                             Department of Defense
                               INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 6490.07
                                                                              February 5, 2010

                                                                                     USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Deployment-Limiting Medical Conditions for Service Members and DoD Civilian
             Employees

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02 (Reference
(a)) and the guidance in DoDDs 6200.04 and 1400.31 (References (b) and (c)), this Instruction
establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for ensuring that Service
members and DoD civilian employees, including Coast Guard Service members and civilian
employees at all times, including when the Coast Guard is a Service in the Department of
Homeland Security by agreement with that Department, (hereafter referred to collectively as
“DoD personnel”) deployed and deploying on contingency deployments are medically able to
accomplish their duties in deployed environments.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction:

   a. Applies to:

       (1) OSD, the Military Departments (including the Coast Guard at all times, including
when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security by agreement with that
Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the
Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the
Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the
Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

      (2) DoD personnel deployed and deploying on contingency deployments consistent with
DoD and Service-specific guidance, including Reference (c) and DoD Instruction (DoDI)
1400.32 (Reference (d)).

    b. Does not apply to contingency contractor personnel, who shall comply with the guidance
in DoDI 3020.41 (Reference (e)), or to shipboard operations that are not anticipated to involve
operations ashore, which shall follow Service-specific guidance.
                                                                  DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

    c. Shall be used as a minimum medical standard for all deploying and deployed DoD
personnel, BUT does not alter or replace:

        (1) With respect to military personnel, the accession, retention, and general fitness for
duty standards previously established by the Department of Defense, including those described
in DoDI 6130.4, DoDD 6130.3, Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)) Memorandum, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA))
Memorandum, and DoDI 6485.01 (References (f) through (j), respectively).

        (2) With respect to civilian employees covered by sections 791 and 794a of title 29,
United States Code (also known and hereafter referred to as “The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as
amended” (Reference (k))), the legal obligations of a DoD Component as an employer pursuant
to that Act.

       (3) More stringent individual Military Department policy guidance or Service-specific
readiness requirements.


3. DEFINITIONS. These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

    a. contingency. A situation requiring military operations in response to natural disasters,
terrorists, subversives, or as otherwise directed by appropriate authority to protect US interests.

    b. contingency deployment. A deployment that is limited to outside the continental United
States, over 30 days in duration, and in a location with medical support from only non-fixed
(temporary) military medical treatment facilities. It is a deployment in which the relocation of
forces and materiel is to an operational area in which a contingency is or may be occurring.

    c. deployment. The relocation of forces and materiel to desired operational areas.
Deployment encompasses all activities from origin or home station through destination,
specifically including intra-continental United States, inter-theater, and intra-theater movement
legs, staging, and holding areas.

   d. medical assessment. The total of the pre-deployment activities described in section 1 of
Enclosure 2 of this Instruction and those listed in paragraph E4.A1.1 of DoDI 6490.03
(Reference (l)).

   e. trained DoD health-care provider. A physician, physician assistant, nurse practitioner,
advanced practice nurse, independent duty corpsman, independent duty medical technician, or
special forces medical sergeant.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. The medical standards in this Instruction are mandatory for contingency deployments, and
permissible for any other deployment, based on the commander’s decision.



                                                  2
                                                                 DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010



    b. DoD personnel with existing medical conditions may deploy based upon a medical
assessment as described in Enclosure 2 and subparagraph E4.A1.1.1. of Reference (l), which for
civilian employees shall be consistent with subparagraph 4.g.(3)(c) of DoDD 1404.10 (Reference
(m)), and the requirements of The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, when such civilian
employees are covered by that Act, if all of these conditions are met:

       (1) The condition is not of such a nature or duration that an unexpected worsening or
physical trauma is likely to have a grave medical outcome or negative impact on mission
execution.

       (2) The condition is stable and reasonably anticipated by the pre-deployment medical
evaluator not to worsen during the deployment in light of physical, physiological, psychological,
and nutritional effects of the duties and location.

        (3) Any required, ongoing health care or medications anticipated to be needed for the
duration of the deployment are available in theater within the Military Health System.
Medication must have no special handling, storage, or other requirements (e.g., refrigeration,
cold chain, or electrical power requirements). Medication must be well tolerated within harsh
environmental conditions (e.g. heat or cold stress, sunlight) and should not cause significant side
effects in the setting of moderate dehydration.

        (4) There is no need for routine evacuation out of theater for continuing diagnostics or
other evaluations. (All such evaluations should be accomplished before deployment.)

       (5) In the case of civilian employees covered by The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as
amended, it is determined, based upon an individualized assessment, that the employee can
perform the essential functions of the position in the deployed environment, with or without a
reasonable accommodation, without causing undue hardship. In evaluating undue hardship, the
nature of the accommodation and the location of the deployment must be considered. Further,
the employee’s medical condition must not pose a significant risk of substantial harm to the
employee or others taking into account the condition of the relevant deployed environment.

   c. Individuals with the conditions in Enclosure 3, based on medical assessments in
accordance with Enclosure 2 and Reference (l), shall not deploy unless a waiver can be granted
according to the procedures in section 3 of Enclosure 2.

    d. If a Service member is found qualified for retention with no limitations on assignments or
deployments following evaluation of a medical condition by competent medical and personnel
authority of his or her respective Service, and if the condition remains stable, a deployment
waiver of that same condition is not required by this Instruction.

    e. Deploying commanders may add additional medical requirements to the standards in this
Instruction based upon the demands of a specific deployment. Commanders may apply these
medical standards to other deployments based on the health risk, physical demands, and medical




                                                 3
                                                                 DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

capabilities of the deployment. These additional standards must be consistent with The
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, when applied to civilian employees covered by that Act.

    f. Protected health information collected, used, and released in the execution of this
Instruction shall be protected as required by DoD 6025.18-R (Reference (n)) and DoD
8580.02-R (Reference (o)).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 4.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 2.


7. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures:
   1. References
   2. Procedures
   3. Medical Conditions Usually Precluding Contingency Deployment
   4. Responsibilities




                                                 4
                                                                                              DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


REFERENCES ................................................................................................................................6


PROCEDURES................................................................................................................................7

     PERFORMANCE OF MEDICAL ASSESSMENTS ...............................................................7
     DETERMINATIONS OF DEPLOYABILITY .........................................................................7
     WAIVERS .................................................................................................................................8
     ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................8

MEDICAL CONDITIONS USUALLY PRECLUDING CONTINGENCY DEPLOYMENT ....10

RESPONSIBILITIES ....................................................................................................................13

     ASD(HA) .................................................................................................................................13
     SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS, COMMANDANT OF THE
        COAST GUARD, AND THE DIRECTORS OF THE DEFENSE AGENCIES
        AND THE DoD FIELD ACTIVITIES ..............................................................................13
     CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF ...............................................................13
     COMBATANT COMMANDERS...........................................................................................14
     COMMANDER, UNITED STATES SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND
        (CDRUSSOCOM) .............................................................................................................14




                                                                      5                                                     CONTENTS
                                                              DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b)   DoD Directive 6200.04, “Force Health Protection (FHP),” October 9, 2004
(c)   DoD Directive 1400.31, “DoD Civilian Work Force Contingency and Emergency Planning
      and Execution,” April 28, 1995
(d)   DoD Instruction 1400.32, “DoD Civilian Work Force Contingency and Emergency
      Planning Guidelines and Procedures,” April 24, 1995
(e)   DoD Instruction 3020.41, “Contractor Personnel Authorized to Accompany the U.S. Armed
      Forces,” October 3, 2005
(f)   DoD Instruction 6130.4, “Medical Standards for Appointment, Enlistment, or Induction in
      the Armed Forces,” January 18, 2005
(g)   DoD Directive 6130.3, “Physical Standards for Appointment, Enlistment, and Induction,”
      December 15, 2000
(h)   Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Memorandum, “Policy Guidance
      for Medical Deferral,” February 9, 2006
(i)   Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs Memorandum, “Policy Guidance for
      Deployment-Limiting Psychiatric Conditions and Medications,” November 7, 2006
(j)   DoD Instruction 6485.01, “Human Immunodeficiency Virus,” October 17, 2006
(k)   Sections 791 and 794a of title 29, United States Code (also known as “The Rehabilitation
      Act of 1973, as amended”)
(l)   DoD Instruction 6490.03, “Deployment Health,” August 11, 2006
(m)   DoD Directive 1404.10, “DoD Civilian Expeditionary Workforce,” January 23, 2009
(n)   DoD 6025.18-R, “DoD Health Information Privacy Regulation,” January 24, 2003
(o)   DoD 8580.02-R, “DoD Health Information Security Regulation,” July 12, 2007




                                              6                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                          PROCEDURES


1. PERFORMANCE OF MEDICAL ASSESSMENTS. All DoD personnel serving in a
contingency deployment as defined in section 3 of the front matter of this Instruction must
undergo a medical assessment prior to deployment in accordance with subparagraph E4.A1.1.1.
of Reference (l). The mandatory portions of the assessment are:

    a. Completion of DD Forms 2795, “Pre-Deployment Health Assessment,” and 2766, “Adult
Preventive and Chronic Care Flowsheet” (available on the Internet at
http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/infomgt/forms/formsprogram.htm). Except for Coast Guard
personnel, completed copies of both of these forms must be submitted to the Defense Medical
Surveillance System and included in DoD personnel deployment paperwork, and shall serve as
the deployment medical record. For Coast Guard personnel, the DD Form 2766 shall be placed
in the member’s health record, but all other procedures for Coast Guard personnel shall be as
described in this Instruction for DoD personnel.

   b. Medical record review.

   c. Current periodic health assessment (Service members only).

   d. Physical exam within 1 year of deployment (DoD civilian employees only).


2. DETERMINATIONS OF DEPLOYABILITY. A trained DoD health-care provider must
make a provisional determination on DD Form 2795 as to the deployability of DoD personnel.
This decision should be based on all of the information obtained in the medical assessment
described in section 1 of this enclosure.

     a. In general, DoD personnel with any of the medical conditions in Enclosure 3, and based
on a medical assessment, shall not deploy unless a waiver is granted. Consideration should be
made for the nature of the disability and if it would put the individual at increased risk of injury
or illness, or if the condition is likely to significantly worsen in the deployed environment.

       (1) For civilian employees covered by The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, it
must be determined, before deployment and based upon an individualized assessment, that the
employee can perform the essential functions of the position in the deployed environment, with
or without a reasonable accommodation, without causing undue hardship. In evaluating undue
hardship, the nature of the accommodation and the location of the deployment must be
considered. Further, the employee’s medical condition must not pose a significant risk of
substantial harm to the employee or others taking into account the condition of the relevant
deployed environment.




                                                  7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

       (2) The requirement to provide reasonable accommodations for disabilities does not
apply to deployment of military members, nor to civilian employees not covered by The
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended.

    b. All individuals deemed not deployable at the deployment processing center shall be
returned to their originating unit with a DD Form 2795 and a summary of their non-deployable
medical condition to provide to the unit medical personnel. The civilian supervisor shall also be
notified if the individual is deemed not deployable.


3. WAIVERS. If a commander or supervisor of DoD personnel (except for SOF personnel)
wishes to deploy an individual with a medical condition that could be disqualifying (see
Enclosure 3, the commander or supervisor must request a waiver. The waiver request shall be
submitted to the applicable Combatant Commander through the individual’s servicing military
medical unit in the case of a Service member, or through the individual’s personnel office in the
case of a civilian employee, with medical input provided by the individual’s medical provider.

    a. Requests for a waiver shall include a summary of a detailed medical evaluation or
consultation concerning the medical condition(s). Maximization of mission accomplishment and
the protection of the health of personnel are the ultimate goals. Justification shall include
statements indicating service experience, position to be placed in, any known specific hazards of
the position, anticipated availability and need for care while deployed, the benefit expected to
accrue from the waiver, the recommendation of the commander or supervisor, and the reasonable
accommodations that can be provided for civilian employees covered by The Rehabilitation Act
of 1973, as amended. For all DoD personnel, the factors listed in subparagraphs 4.b.(1) through
4.b.(4), (and subparagraph 4.b.(5) for civilian employees only) of the front matter shall be
discussed.

   b. For SOF personnel with any of the conditions listed in Enclosure 3, medical clearance
may be granted by the CDRUSSOCOM, subject to the approval of the Combatant Commander
under which the Service member is deployed or will deploy.

    c. In the case of civilian employees covered by The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended,
a waiver must be granted if it is determined, based upon an individualized assessment, that the
employee can perform the essential functions of the position in the deployed environment, with
or without a reasonable accommodation, without causing undue hardship. In evaluating undue
hardship, the nature of the accommodation and the location of the deployment must be
considered. Further, the employee’s medical condition must not pose a significant risk of
substantial harm to the employee or others taking into account the condition of the relevant
deployed environment.


4. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

   a. Commanders and Supervisors. Commanders and supervisors shall:




                                                8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

        (1) Ensure deploying DoD personnel are appropriately assessed by competent medical
authority before deployment, in accordance with Reference (l).

       (2) Request waivers for DoD personnel they wish to deploy who have the medical
conditions described in Enclosure 3.

       (3) Ensure that DoD personnel under their command meet the medical standards of the
gaining commander when individuals and their leaders deploy in support of other DoD
Components. As these standards may differ by assignment, they must be coordinated separately
for each deployment.

   b. Supervisors. Supervisors shall additionally:

        (1) Identify medical and physical requirements for deployable positions designated for
fill by DoD civilian employees.

      (2) Ensure that such requirements are documented in position descriptions, vacancy
announcements, and other appropriate sources.

      (3) Ensure that DoD civilian employees meet such requirements; take appropriate action
when employees no longer meet identified requirements.

   c. DoD Personnel

       (1) DoD personnel in deployable positions shall be responsible for meeting the medical
and physical requirements of their deployment-specific tasks.

       (2) DoD personnel who are civilian employees selected for deployment opportunities
outside their chain of supervision shall be responsible for meeting and maintaining the medical
standards identified for the deployment by the responsible commanding officer.




                                                9                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

                                          ENCLOSURE 3

  MEDICAL CONDITIONS USUALLY PRECLUDING CONTINGENCY DEPLOYMENT


This list of conditions is not intended to be all-inclusive. A list of all possible diagnoses and
their severity that may cause an individual to be potentially non-deployable, pending further
evaluation, would be too extensive. Medical evaluators must consider climate, altitude, rations,
housing, duty assignment, and medical services available in theater when deciding whether an
individual with a specific medical condition is deployable. In general, individuals with the
conditions in paragraphs a. through h. of this enclosure, based upon a medical assessment as
described in Enclosure 2 and Reference (l), shall not deploy unless a waiver is granted.

   a. Conditions Affecting Force Health Protection

        (1) Physical or psychological conditions resulting in the inability to effectively wear
personal protective equipment, including protective mask, ballistic helmet, body armor, and
chemical and/or biological protective garments, regardless of the nature of the condition that
causes the inability to wear the equipment if wearing such equipment may be reasonably
anticipated or required in the deployed location.

        (2) Conditions that prohibit immunizations or the use of force health protection
prescription products (FHPPPs) required for the specific deployment. Depending on the
applicable threat assessment, required FHPPPs may include atropine, epinephrine, and/or
pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM chloride) auto-injectors; certain antimicrobials and antimalarials;
and pyridostigmine bromide.

   b. Unresolved Health Conditions Requiring Care or Affecting Performance

       (1) Any chronic medical condition that requires frequent clinical visits, fails to respond
to adequate conservative treatment, or necessitates significant limitation of physical activity.

        (2) Absence of a dental exam within the last 12 months or presence of the likelihood that
dental treatment or reevaluation for oral conditions will result in dental emergencies within 12
months. Individuals being evaluated by a non-DoD civilian dentist should use DD Form 2813,
“DoD Active Duty/Reserve Forces Dental Examination,” as proof of dental examination
(available on the Internet at
http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/infomgt/forms/formsprogram.htm).

       (3) Pregnancy.

        (4) Any medical condition that requires either durable medical equipment or appliances,
or periodic evaluation or treatment by medical specialists that is not readily available in theater.

        (5) Any unresolved acute or chronic illness or injury that would impair duty performance
in a deployed environment during the duration of the deployment.



                                                 10                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010



        (6) Cancer that requires continuing treatment or specialty medical evaluations during the
anticipated duration of the deployment.

       (7) Precancerous lesions that have not been treated and/or evaluated and that require
treatment and/or evaluation during the anticipated duration of the deployment.

        (8) Any medical condition that requires surgery or for which surgery has been performed
that requires rehabilitation or additional surgery to remove devices.

       (9) Any musculoskeletal condition that significantly impairs performance of duties in a
deployed environment.

        (10) An acute exacerbation of a physical or mental health condition that could
significantly affect duty performance.

   c. Conditions That Could Cause Sudden Incapacitation

       (1) Recurrent loss of consciousness for any reason.

        (2) Any medical condition that could result in sudden incapacitation including a history
of stroke within the last 24 months, seizure disorders, and diabetes mellitus type I or II treated
with insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents.

    d. Pulmonary Disorders. Asthma that has a forced expiratory volume-1 (FEV-1) of less than
or equal to 60 percent of predicted FEV-1 despite appropriate therapy and that has required
hospitalization at least 2 times in the last 12 months, or that requires daily systemic (not
inhalational) steroids.

   e. Infectious Disease

        (1) Active tuberculosis or known blood-borne diseases that may be transmitted to others
in a deployed environment.

       (2) A diagnosis of human immunodeficiency (HIV) antibody positive with the presence
of progressive clinical illness or immunological deficiency. The cognizant Combatant Command
surgeon shall be consulted in all instances of HIV seropositivity before medical clearance for
deployment.

   f. Sensory Disorders

        (1) Hearing Loss. The requirement for use of a hearing aid does not necessarily preclude
deployment. However, the individual must have sufficient unaided hearing to perform duties
safely.




                                                11                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

        (2) Vision Loss. Best corrected visual acuity must meet job requirements to perform
duties safely.

   g. Cardiac and Vascular Disorders

       (1) Hypertension not controlled with medication or that requires frequent monitoring.

       (2) Symptomatic coronary artery disease.

       (3) History of myocardial infarction within 1 year of deployment.

       (4) History of coronary artery bypass graft, coronary artery angioplasty, carotid
endarterectomy, other arterial stenting, or aneurysm repair within 1 year of deployment.

        (5) Cardiac dysrhythmias or arrhythmias, either symptomatic or requiring medical or
electrophysiologic control (presence of an implanted defibrillator and/or pacemaker).

       (6) Heart failure.

   h. Mental Health Disorders

      (1) Psychotic and/or bipolar disorders. (See Reference (i) for detailed guidance on
deployment-limiting psychiatric conditions or psychotropic medications.)

         (2) Psychiatric disorders under treatment with fewer than 3 months of demonstrated
stability.

       (3) Clinical psychiatric disorders with residual symptoms that impair duty performance.

       (4) Mental health conditions that pose a substantial risk for deterioration and/or
recurrence of impairing symptoms in the deployed environment.

       (5) Chronic medical conditions that require ongoing treatment with antipsychotics,
lithium, or anticonvulsants.




                                                12                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

                                        ENCLOSURE 4

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASD(HA). The ASD(HA), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R),
shall review and issue to the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Directors of the
Defense Agencies and the DoD Field Activities technical adjustments to the deployment
standards in Enclosure 3 as needed, based on changing conditions or additional unanticipated
difficulties encountered in the in-theater management of medical conditions.


2. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS, COMMANDANT OF THE
COAST GUARD, AND DIRECTORS OF THE DEFENSE AGENCIES AND THE DoD FIELD
ACTIVITIES. The Secretaries of the Military Departments, the Commandant of the Coast
Guard, and the Directors of the Defense Agencies and the DoD Field Activities shall:

    a. Direct their respective Components to apply and uniformly implement the standards in
this Instruction.

   b. Ensure that:

       (1) All deploying DoD personnel assigned to their respective Service, Defense Agency,
or DoD Field Activity have a medical assessment in accordance with Reference (l), including a
medical record review, to evaluate their medical status before contingency deployments and
other deployments pursuant to paragraph 4.a. of the front matter of this Instruction.

        (2) Pre-deployment processes are in place to identify individuals with deployment-
limiting medical conditions.

      (3) DoD personnel who occupy deployable positions maintain a high state of pre-
deployment health and medical readiness.


3. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall ensure that the Combatant Commanders:

    a. Establish a minimum standard when developing medical requirements for entering the
theater of operations that factors in the medical conditions described in Enclosure 3 of this
Instruction.

   b. Implement a medical requirements waiver process that includes waiver computerization
and archival storage.




                                               13                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 6490.07, February 5, 2010

4. COMBATANT COMMANDERS. For all DoD personnel deployed or deploying to a theater
within their respective Combatant Commands, the Combatant Commanders shall:

    a. Establish a process for reviewing recommendations from the Services regarding the
granting of exceptions to medical standards (waivers) for the conditions in Enclosure 3,
including a mechanism to track and archive all approved or denied waivers and the medical
conditions requiring the waivers.

   b. Serve as the final approval authority for exceptions to the medical standards (waivers)
made pursuant to the procedures in this Instruction.


5. COMMANDER, UNITED STATES SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND
(CDRUSSOCOM). The CDRUSSOCOM shall perform the responsibilities in section 2 of this
enclosure for SOF personnel.




                                               14                               ENCLOSURE 4
