                              Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 2010.06
                                                                                   July 29, 2009
                                                         Incorporating Change 1, August 31, 2018

                                                                                        USD(A&S)

SUBJECT: Materiel Interoperability and Standardization with Allies and Coalition Partners

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 2010.6 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction (DoDI) in
accordance with the authority in DoDD 5134.01 (Reference (b)) to establish policies and
procedures for materiel interoperability and standardization with allies and coalition partners
pursuant to section 2457 of title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (c)).

    b. In accordance with DoDD 5000.01 and DoDI 5000.02, (References (d) and (e)) provides
DoD procedures and responsibilities for materiel interoperability and standardization with allies
and coalition partners, and describes the role of Reciprocal Defense Procurement Memorandums
of Understanding (RDP MOUs) in promoting interoperability.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The Department of Defense pursue materiel interoperability with allies and coalition
partners in accordance with Reference (d). This means that systems, units, and forces shall be
able to provide and accept data, information, materiel, and services to and from other systems,
units, and forces and shall effectively interoperate with those of allies and coalition partners.
                                                                     DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


   b. Equipment procured for U.S. forces employed in North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), other allied, and coalition operations be standardized or at least interoperable with the
equipment of allies and coalition partners.

   c. Materiel interoperability with allies and coalition partners shall adhere to the Defense
Standardization Program (DoDI 4120.24 (Reference (f)) and DoD 4120.24-M (Reference (g)).

    d. The Department of Defense shall comply, to the maximum extent feasible, with
applicable materiel international standardization agreements ratified by the United States, subject
to systems engineering tradeoffs under Reference (e).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3 for procedures for accomplishing materiel interoperability,
accomplishing materiel standardization, interoperability of future military concepts throughout
the Defense Acquisition Management System, NATO commitments, and RDP MOUs.


6. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (h)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures




Change 1, 08/31/2018                            2
                                                                    DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


                                         ENCLOSURE 1

                                         REFERENCES


(a)     DoD Directive 2010.6, “Materiel Interoperability with Allies and Coalition Partners,”
        November 10, 2004 (hereby canceled)
(b)     DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
        Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005
(c)     Sections 2350a, 2358, 2457, 2533b, and 23501 of title 10, United States Code
(d)     DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003
(e)     DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,”
        December 8, 2008
(f)     DoD Instruction 4120.24, “Defense Standardization Program (DSP),” June 18, 1998
(g)     DoD Manual 4120.24-M, “Defense Standardization Program (DSP) Policies and
        Procedures,” March 9, 2000
(h)     Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
        Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
        of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(i)     DoD Directive 4630.05, “Interoperability and Supportability of Information Technology
        (IT) and National Security Systems (NSS),” May 5, 2004
(j)     DoD Instruction 2000.20, “Cooperative Logistics Supply Support Arrangements,”
        August 29, 2005
(k)     The Technical Cooperation Program Document 201, “Policies, Organisation and
        Procedures in The Technical Cooperation Program, September 30, 2007
(l)     DoD Directive 8000.01, “Management of the Department of Defense Information
        Enterprise,” February 10, 2009
(m)     DoD Instruction 8110.1, “Multinational Information Sharing Networks Implementation,”
        February 6, 2004
(n)     DoD Directive 3000.05, “Military Support for Stability, Security, Transition, and
        Reconstruction (SSTR) Operations,” November 28, 2005
(o)     Directive Type Memorandum 04-006, “Information Technology Portfolio Management,”
        March 22, 2004
(p)     Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Global Information Grid Enterprise Services
        (GIG ES) Core Enterprise Services (CES) Implementation,” November 10, 2003
(q)     DoD Directive 5230.20, “Visits and Assignments of Foreign Nationals,” June 22, 2005
(r)     DoD Instruction 2015.4, “Defense Research, Development, Test and Evaluation (RDT&E)
        Information Exchange Program (IEP),” February 7, 2002
(s)     DoD Directive 5530.3, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987
(t)     Sections 2767 and 2796d of title 22, United States Code
(u)     Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics,
        “Coalition Warfare Management Plan,” as amended 1
(v)     DoD Manual 5105.38-M, “Security Assistance Management Manual (SAMM),”
        October 3, 2003
(w)     DoD Directive 2010.9, “Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreements,” April 28, 2003

1
    http://www.acq.osd.mil/ic/cwp.html

                                                3
Change 1, 08/31/2018                                                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


(x) North Atlantic Treaty Organization, “The Alliance’s Strategic Concept,” April 24, 1999 2
(y) North Atlantic Treaty Organization, “Comprehensive Political Guidance,” November 29,
     2006 3
(z) Joint Publication 3-16, “Multinational Operations,” March 7, 2007
(aa) DoD Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS), as amended
(ab) Chapter 1, sections 10a-d of title 41, United States Code




2
     http://www.nato.int/docu/pr/1999/p99-065e.htm
3
    http://www.nato.int/docu/basictxt/b061129e.htm


Change 1, 08/31/2018                                 4                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L) shall:

    a. Advise the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of Defense on U.S. materiel
interoperability with allies and coalition partners.

    b. Devise DoD research, development, and acquisition (RD&A) and program policies for
interoperability, information assurance, and standardization; provide guidance and training for
the acquisition workforce for implementation of these policies.

   c. Coordinate U.S. positions on the harmonization of NATO weapons needs and
complementary schedules for new weapons development and production.

    d. Coordinate RD&A efforts with allies and coalition partners as appropriate to ensure
interoperability and standardization of DoD materiel and services, to include information
assurance in cooperation with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information
Integration/DoD Chief Information Officer (ASD(NII)/DoD CIO). DoD policy for the
information technology aspects of interoperability and supportability, including National
Security Systems, is in DoD Directive 4630.05 (Reference (i)).

    e. Represent the United States as the National Armaments Director at the NATO Conference
of National Armaments Directors (CNAD) and other appropriate international forums.

    f. Ensure and monitor DoD representation in appropriate groups and subgroups of the
CNAD. Representation shall be coordinated with the Department of State, through the Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), on behalf of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the ASD(NII)/DoD CIO, and the Heads of the other
DoD Components, as appropriate, and other official international meetings as the USD(AT&L)
deems applicable.

   g. Ensure that Military Departments and Defense Agencies consider material interoperability
and standardization throughout all phases of the Defense Acquisition Management System
(Reference (e)), and that U.S.-ratified international standardization agreements (ISAs) are
implemented to the maximum extent practical (Reference (i)).

    h. Assist the Military Departments and other DoD Components to obtain information on
allied and coalition systems and subsystems.

   i. Provide, in conjunction with the Military Departments, technical positions regarding the
exchange of technology with allies and coalition partners, and oversight for ongoing programs
involving the transfer of technology.



Change 1, 08/31/2018                            5                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


   j. Consult with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the interaction of interoperability
and standardization, strategy, force objectives, and joint warfighting capabilities.

   k. Review DoD acquisition policies and regulations and incorporate revisions to maximize,
within the constraints imposed by law, the opportunity for sources in countries with which the
United States has signed a RDP MOU to compete with U.S. sources for DoD business.

   l. Ensure that the Department of Defense administers the acquisition policies for all
programs and activities outlined in this Instruction.

   m. Develop DoD logistic policies and guidelines that support and facilitate programs for
materiel interoperability and standardization with allies and coalition partners.

   n. Ensure appropriate representation of the United States at NATO and other international
acquisition, technology, and logistics activities.


2. USD(P). The USD(P) shall:

   a. Coordinate overall DoD policy on multinational interoperability and standardization.

    b. On matters concerning interoperability and standardization, act as the principal contact
within the Department of Defense for the Department of State and other U.S. Government
agencies and appropriate allied and coalition partner countries and agencies, and coordinate with
those organizations.

  c. Provide policy guidance on the pursuit of interoperability and standardization within
NATO and with other allies and coalition partners.

   d. Initiate action to change DoD policies, procedures, and regulations or propose changes to
laws that block or impede the achievement of multinational interoperability and standardization
within NATO.

   e. Monitor the political and economic factors that affect interoperability and standardization.


3. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION AGENCY (DSCA). The Director,
DSCA, under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), shall:

    a. Serve as the focal point for all requests and as the approval authority for foreign military
sales (FMS) involving establishment of cooperative logistics supply support arrangements
(CLSSAs) in accordance with DoDI 2000.20 (Reference (j)).

   b. Establish procedures for the implementation and administration of CLSSAs.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                              6                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


4. ASD(NII)/DoD CIO. The ASD(NII)/DoD CIO shall:

   a. Lead DoD efforts to achieve interoperability for data and information, communications,
and command and control with allies and coalition partners.

  b. Use the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) Joint Interoperability Test
Command (JTIC) to test for interoperability and report results for foreign systems.


5. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND DIRECTORS OF THE
DEFENSE AGENCIES. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and Directors of the
Defense Agencies shall:

    a. Advise the USD(AT&L) on U.S. interoperability with allies and coalition partners and
ensure that materiel interoperability and standardization are considered in the basic conceptual
approach in the development, production, and product improvement of all systems and
equipment intended for use in coalition operations and that all applicable U.S. ratified materiel
international standardization agreements are complied with to the greatest extent feasible.

    b. Ensure that weapon system design takes into account potential future transfers to allied
nations, incorporates needed anti-tamper features, and accommodates modifications that make
export possible and affordable.

     c. Establish and maintain close, parallel relationships with NATO allies, major non-NATO
allies, friendly foreign nations, and organizations within NATO and The Technical Cooperation
Program (TTCP) for developing compatible doctrine and operational concepts (see TTCP
Document 201 (Reference (k))). This includes early discussion and definition of future
capability needs and materiel requirements and involves close collaborating in the acquisition of
interoperable or standardized systems, subsystems, and follow-on logistic support.

    d. Provide representation at appropriate groups under the NATO CNAD, the NATO
Committee for Standardization, the NATO Standardization Agency, the NATO Consultation
Command and Control Board, the Senior NATO Logisticians Conference, and other groups, as
required by the appropriate OSD components, and provide Military Department coordination on
interoperability and standardization matters developed within NATO. Proposed U.S. positions
shall be coordinated with the appropriate DoD Components.

    e. Provide representation, as required, for other international forums affecting
interoperability and standardization, and provide Military Department coordination on matters
developed within these groups. Proposed U.S. positions shall be coordinated with the
appropriate DoD Components.


6. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:




Change 1, 08/31/2018                             7                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


   a. Identify opportunities for and impediments to improved interoperability of U.S. forces
with allies and coalition partners.

    b. Coordinate doctrine and operational concepts with those of U.S. allies and coalition
partners to enhance materiel interoperability and standardization.

    c. Ensure there is appropriate U.S. representation at materiel interoperability and
standardization NATO meetings and other applicable international military meetings.

    d. Ensure that the combatant commands actively support the pursuit of interoperability and
standardization with allies and coalition partners through validated and approved capabilities
documents (Reference (d)) throughout the Defense Acquisition Management System (Reference
(e)).

     e. Validate that capabilities are interoperable with allies and coalition partners. Ensure that
all special operations forces (SOF) weapons systems capability needs are reviewed by the U.S.
Special Operations Command to ensure that SOF techniques, tactics, or capabilities are not
transmitted to governments or enemies sympathetic to the overthrow of the United States, as
verified by the Department of State.

    f. Advise the Secretary of Defense on interaction between international interoperability
efforts and national military force goals, planning, and programs.


7. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:

   a. Identify opportunities for and impediments to improved interoperability of U.S. forces
with allies and coalition partners.

     b. Coordinate doctrine and operational concepts and requirements harmonization with U.S.
allies and coalition partners.

    c. Ensure there is appropriate U.S. representation at materiel interoperability and
standardization NATO meetings and other applicable international military meetings.

    d. Pursue materiel interoperability and standardization with allies and coalition partners
throughout the Defense Acquisition System (Reference (e)).




Change 1, 08/31/2018                              8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. ACCOMPLISHING MATERIEL INTEROPERABILITY. Interoperability shall be
accomplished by using joint, interagency and multinational concepts, technologies, integrated
architectures, information technology, and national security systems. Interoperability shall also
be accomplished by compliance with Reference (i) and DoDD 8000.1, DoDD 8100.1, DoDI
8110.1, DoDD 3000.05, Directive-Type Memorandum 04-006, and Deputy Secretary of Defense
Memorandum (References (l) through (p)).


2. ACCOMPLISHING MATERIEL STANDARDIZATION. Standardization shall be
accomplished with allies and coalition partners by standardizing on like products and
technologies; using common set(s) of specifications and standards; and cooperating with industry
in the development of standards. Thereby standardization will improve military operational
readiness by achieving interoperability of systems, subsystems, and equipment; logistics support
by reducing the variety of supply items; and reliability, maintainability, and safety of systems
and supplies. Standardization also promotes requirements consensus; the use of standard
commercial processes, practices and competition; the reduction of total ownership costs by
reducing nonstandard parts; and current systems, subsystems, and equipment modernization
through insertion of new technology and parts. Standardization is accomplished in accordance
with References (f) and (g).


3. INTEROPERABILITY OF FUTURE MILITARY CONCEPTS THROUGHOUT THE
DEFENSE ACQUISITION MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. The Department of Defense shall
consider future military concepts for multinational operations in the acquisition of all materiel
intended for use by U.S. forces. These concepts may require allied and/or coalition forces to
operate seamlessly as part of a U.S.-led or supported coalition in a net-centric and cooperative,
reduced logistics footprint environment. In this environment, operational effectiveness shall
depend increasingly on the ability of U.S. forces, allies, and coalition forces to rapidly share
information, equipment, and consumables in response to changing battlefield conditions.
Therefore, the Department of Defense shall pursue interoperability and standardization and
address export considerations with allies and coalition partners throughout the Defense
Acquisition Management System under References (e) and (f). Interoperability and export
feasibility shall be considered:

   a. During the materiel solution analysis and technology development phases of pre-systems
acquisition, through:

       (1) International forums.

       (2) Personnel exchanges under DoDD 5230.20 (Reference (q)).




Change 1, 08/31/2018                             9                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


       (3) Information exchanges under DoDI 2015.4 (Reference (r)).

       (4) Studies, including the analysis of alternatives under Reference (e).

       (5) Project agreements, annexes, or arrangements under DoDD 5530.3 (Reference (s)).

       (6) Procedures or streamlined procedures authorized by Enclosure 10 of Reference (e).

        (7) Other activities that facilitate and provide early joint technology and capability
definition, development, experimentation, refinement, testing and transition, examples of which
are found in Enclosure 3 of Reference (e).

    b. During the engineering and manufacturing development and demonstration phase of
systems acquisition, or earlier, through:

        (1) The procurement or modification of commercially available products and
technologies from international sources or the additional production or modification of allied
military systems or equipment under Reference (d).

       (2) Cooperative research and development under authorities such as section 2767 of title
22, U.S.C. (Reference (t)), and sections 2350a and 2358 of Reference (c).

       (3) International cooperative testing, testing of foreign non-developmental items, and
reciprocal testing under section 2796d of Reference (t) and sections 2350a(g) and 2350l of
Reference (c).

        (4) Programs providing interoperability for coalition operations, including, but not
limited to, the Coalition Warfare Management Plan - 2010-2011 (Reference (u)) and joint
capability technology demonstrations.

      (5) Compliance with applicable U.S. ratified materiel international standardization
agreements (Reference (f)).

   c. During the production and deployment phase of systems acquisition through:

        (1) Cooperative production conducted with a partner nation under a cooperative
international agreement, and featuring a division of labor. Final assembly may be conducted by
one or more of the partners. Most cooperative production programs naturally evolve from earlier
cooperative development phase agreements.

       (2) FMS of military systems or equipment and support involving the use of FMS
procedures and commercial licenses to transfer to a foreign nation, under DoD Manual 5105.38-
M (Reference (v)), the ability to produce U.S. defense articles developed and fielded by the
Department of Defense. Anti-tamper measures during the acquisition process need to be
considered to provide allies with U.S. origin defense articles developed and fielded by the
Department of Defense.



Change 1, 08/31/2018                            10                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 2010.06, July 29, 2009


       (3) Direct commercial sales of military systems, equipment, and support and licensed co-
production involving the use of munitions export licenses to enable U.S. companies to transfer to
foreign governments or foreign companies the ability to produce U.S. defense articles under
Reference (v).

        (4) Purchases of foreign military systems or equipment or foreign industrial participation
in a U.S. defense production program.

    d. During the operations and support phase of sustainment, through procurement of items
that conform to applicable U.S. ratified materiel international standardization agreements
(Reference (f)); cooperative logistics including cooperative logistics supply support
arrangements (Reference (i)); and logistics support acquired or transferred under DoDD 2010.9
(Reference (w)).


4. NATO COMMITMENTS. NATO commitments are imperative. The need for U.S. forces to
meet worldwide commitments does not diminish the importance of maximizing interoperability
and standardization of systems within NATO by entering into cooperative projects under section
2767 of Reference (t) and sections 2350(a) and 2358 of Reference (c). NATO’s Alliance’s
Strategic Concept (Reference (x)) and Comprehensive Political Guidance (Reference (y)) makes
Alliance interoperability and standardization essential. NATO members and Partnership for
Peace countries are likely to be future coalition partners.


5. RDP MOUs. RDP MOUs with NATO member nations and other allied and friendly
governments are intended to promote standardization, rationalization, and interoperability of
military equipment in accordance with Joint Publication 3-16 (Reference (z)).

    a. RDP MOUs establish procurement principles and procedures that provide for
transparency in the conduct of defense procurements, and enhance access for each country’s
industry to the other country’s defense market by removing discriminatory barriers to purchase
of defense supplies, services, and articles to the extent mutually beneficial and consistent with
national laws and regulations and international obligations.

    b. Based on the RDP MOU, each country affords the other certain benefits on a reciprocal
basis. DoD classifies RDP MOU partners as “qualifying countries,” and the DoD Federal
Acquisition Regulation Supplement (Reference (aa)) accords them special treatment, including
provision for duty-free entry of goods delivered under defense contracts and considering them
compliant sources for components that contain specialty metals, for purposes of the specialty
metals restriction (see section 2533b of Reference (c)).

    c. Blanket public interest exceptions to Chapter 1, sections 10a-d of title 41, U.S.C.
(Reference (ab), also known as the Buy American Act) are usually, but not necessarily, made by
the Secretary of Defense for RDP MOU partner countries.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                            11                        ENCLOSURE 3
