Executive Orders | National Archives 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 Top 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 The U.S. National Archives Home 

 
 
 
 Citizen Archivists &middot;
 
 Bookmark/Share 
 &middot;
 Contact Us 

 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 Main menu Research Our Records 
 Veterans&#039; Service Records 
 Educator Resources 
 Visit Us 
 America&#039;s Founding Documents 
 
 
 
 
 
 Office of the Federal Register (OFR) 
 
 Home > OFR > Codification > Executive Orders 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Codification 

 
 
 About the Codification 
 

 
 Alphabetical Index 
 

 
 Chapter Index 
 

 
 Numeric Index 
 

 
 
 
 

 Search the Codification 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 Executive Orders 
 

 Executive Order 12344--Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program 

 Source: The provisions of Executive Order 12344 of Feb. 1, 1982, appear at 47 FR 4979, 3 CFR, 1982 Comp., p. 128, unless otherwise noted. 

 By the authority vested in me as President and as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States of America, with recognition of the crucial importance to national security of the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, and for the purpose of preserving the basic structure, policies, and practices developed for this Program in the past and assuring that the Program will continue to function with excellence, it is hereby ordered as follows: 

 Section 1. The Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program is an integrated program carried out by two organizational units, one in the Department of Energy and the other in the Department of the Navy. 

 Sec. 2. Both organizational units shall be headed by the same individual so that the activities of each may continue in practice under common management. This individual shall direct the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program in both departments. The director shall be qualified by reason of technical background and experience in naval nuclear propulsion. The director may be either a civilian or an officer of the United States Navy, active or retired. 

 Sec. 3. The Secretary of the Navy (through the Secretary of Defense) and the Secretary of Energy shall obtain the approval of the President to appoint the director of the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program for their respective Departments. The director shall be appointed to serve a term of eight years, except that the Secretary of Energy and the Secretary of the Navy may, with mutual concurrence, terminate or extend the term of the respective appointments. 

 Sec. 4. An officer of the United States Navy appointed as director shall be nominated for the grade of Admiral. A civilian serving as director shall be compensated at a rate to be specified at the time of appointment. 

 Sec. 5. Within the Department of Energy, the Secretary of Energy shall assign to the director the responsibility of performing the functions of the Division of Naval Reactors transferred to the Department of Energy by Section 309(a) of the Department of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7158), including assigned civilian power reactor programs, and any naval nuclear propulsion functions of the Department of Energy, including: 

(a) direct supervision over the Bettis and Knolls Atomic Power Laboratories, the Expended Core Facility and naval reactor prototype plants; 

(b) research, development, design, acquisition, specification, construction, inspection, installation, certification, testing, overhaul, refueling, operating practices and procedures, maintenance, supply support, and ultimate disposition, of naval nuclear propulsion plants, including components thereof, and any special maintenance and service facilities related thereto; 

(c) the safety of reactors and associated naval nuclear propulsion plants, and control of radiation and radioactivity associated with naval nuclear propulsion activities, including prescribing and enforcing standards and regulations for these areas as they affect the environment and the safety and health of workers, operators, and the general public; 

(d) training, including training conducted at the naval prototype reactors of the Department of Energy, and assistance and concurrence in the selection, training, qualification, and assignment of personnel reporting to the director and of personnel who supervise, operate, or maintain naval nuclear propulsion plants; and 

(e) administration of the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, including oversight of program support in areas such as security, nuclear safeguards and transportation, public information, procurement, logistics, and fiscal management. 

 Sec. 6. Within the Department of Energy, the director shall report to the Secretary of Energy, through the Assistant Secretary assigned nuclear energy functions and shall serve as a Deputy Assistant Secretary. The director shall have direct access to the Secretary of Energy and other senior officials in the Department of Energy concerning naval nuclear propulsion matters, and to all other personnel who supervise, operate or maintain naval nuclear propulsion plants and support facilities for the Department of Energy. 

 Sec. 7. Within the Department of the Navy, the Secretary of the Navy shall assign to the director responsibility to supervise all technical aspects of the Navy's nuclear propulsion work, including: 

(a) research, development, design, procurement, specification, construction, inspection, installation, certification, testing, overhaul, refueling, operating practices and procedures, maintenance, supply support, and ultimate disposition, of naval nuclear propulsion plants, including components thereof, and any special maintenance and service facilities related thereto; and 

(b) training programs, including Nuclear Power Schools of the Navy, and assistance and concurrence in the selection, training, qualification, and assignment of personnel reporting to the director and of Government personnel who supervise, operate, or maintain naval nuclear propulsion plants. 

 Sec. 8. Within the Department of the Navy, the Secretary of the Navy shall assign to the director responsibility within the Navy for: 

(a) the safety of reactors and associated naval nuclear propulsion plants, and control of radiation and radioactivity associated with naval nuclear propulsion activities, including prescribing and enforcing standards and regulations for these areas as they affect the environment and the safety and health of workers, operators, and the general public. 

(b) administration of the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, including oversight of program support in areas such as security, nuclear safeguards and transportation, public information, procurement, logistics, and fiscal management. 

 Sec. 9. In addition to any other organizational assignments within the Department of the Navy, the director shall report directly to the Chief of Naval Operations. The director shall have direct access to the Secretary of the Navy and other senior officials in the Department of the Navy concerning naval nuclear propulsion matters, and to all other Government personnel who supervise, operate, or maintain naval nuclear propulsion plants and support facilities. 

 Sec. 10. This Order is effective on February 1, 1982. 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016. 
 Contact us with questions or comments .
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Celebrating the Triumph of the American Spirit 
 
 Learn more 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Archives.gov 
 
 
 Information For&#8230; 
 
 
 Citizen Archivists 
 Federal Employees 
 Genealogists 
 Members of Congress 
 Preservation 
 Records Managers 
 The Press 
 
 
 
 
 Publications 
 
 
 Today's Federal Register 
 Prologue Magazine 
 Subscribe to Email Newsletters 
 Blogs 
 All Publications 
 
 
 
 
 Orgs. & Offices 
 
 
 Center for Legislative Archives 
 Federal Records Center 
 Office of the Federal Register 
 Office of the Inspector General 
 Presidential Libraries 
 Staff Directory 
 
 
 
 
 About Us 
 
 
 What is the National Archives? 
 National Archives by the Numbers 
 Doing Business with Us 
 Plans and Reports 
 Open Government 
 Our Plain Language Activities 
 
 
 
 
 I Want To&#8230; 
 
 
 Get My Military Record 
 Plan a Research Visit 
 Visit the National Archives 
 View Online Exhibits 
 Apply for a Grant 
 Research Presidential Records 
 View Highlights from Our Holdings 
 
 
 
 
 Participate 
 
 
 Attend an Event 
 Donate to the Archives 
 Work at the Archives 
 Volunteer at the Archives 
 Celebrate Freedom 250 
 
 
 
 
 Resources 
 
 
 A-Z Index 
 America's Founding Docs 
 Contact Us 
 Social Media 
 En Espa&ntilde;ol 
 FAQs 
 Forms 
 
 
 
 
 Shop Online 
 
 
 Visit the National Archives Store 
 Buy Reproductions and Microfilm 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 Connect With Us 

 
 Facebook 
 X 
 Instagram 
 Tumblr 
 YouTube 
 Blogs 
 Flickr 
 

 

 Contact Us · Accessibility · Privacy Policy · Freedom of Information Act · No FEAR Act · USA.gov 

 The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration 
 1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Top 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Modal Title -->
 &times; 
 
 
 
 Close 
 
 -->
