                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 5136.01
                                                                             September 30, 2013
                                                         Incorporating Change 1, August 10, 2017

                                                                                           DCMO

SUBJECT: Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA))

References: See Enclosure


1. PURPOSE. Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by sections 113 and
138 of Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (a)), this directive reissues DoD
Directive (DoDD) 5136.01 (Reference (b)), under the authority of DoDD 5124.02 (Reference
(c)), to update the responsibilities and functions, relationships, and authorities of the ASD(HA).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to:

     a. OSD, the Military Departments (including the Coast Guard at all times, including when it
is a service in the Department of Homeland Security by agreement with that Department), the
Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant
Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred
to collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).

    b. The Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service and the Commissioned Corps of
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, under agreement with the Department of
Health and Human Services.


3. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS

    a. The ASD(HA) is the principal advisor to the Secretary of Defense and the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)) for all DoD health and force
health protection policies, programs, and activities, and for the Integrated Disability Evaluation
System (IDES). The ASD(HA) ensures the effective execution of the DoD medical mission,
providing and maintaining readiness for medical services and support to members of the Military
Services, including during military operations; their families; those held in the control of the
Military Services; and others entitled to or eligible for DoD medical care and benefits, including
those under TRICARE. In carrying out these responsibilities, the ASD(HA) exercises authority,
                                                            DoDD 5136.01, September 30, 2013


direction, and control over the DoD medical and dental personnel authorizations and policy,
facilities, programs, funding, and other resources in the DoD, and:

        (1) Develops policies, conducts analyses, provides advice, and makes recommendations
to the USD(P&R), the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P), the Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L), and the Secretary of
Defense; issues guidance; and provides oversight to the DoD Components on matters pertaining
to the DoD Military Health System (MHS).

        (2) Develops policies, procedures, and standards that govern the management of DoD
health and medical programs, including, but not limited to, medical research and development,
clinical investigations program, patient movement, medical special pays, health professions
accessions and training, graduate medical education, patient rights and responsibilities, medical
quality assurance, HIV/AIDS prevention, medical records, health information privacy, organ and
tissue donation, DoD veterinary and food protection services, preventive medicine, health
promotion, medical materiel, force health protection and readiness, health surveillance, DoD
blood program, public health and medical preparedness, and the Armed Forces Medical
Examiner System.

        (3) Reviews, evaluates, and undertakes management oversight activities for DoD health
and medical policies, plans, programs, and systems to ensure they are compatible with and
executed according to established DoD policy and standards; supports Total Force objectives,
requirements, and readiness across the DoD MHS; promotes joint operation of the MHS, a
sustainable health program budget, and an integrated health delivery system to assure readiness,
improve health, enhance the experience of care, and lower healthcare costs. Oversees and directs
changes in the execution of health-related matters across the DoD as required.

       (4) Serves as resource manager for all DoD health and medical financial and other
resources and:

          (a) Prepares and submits, in the DoD Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and
Execution (PPBE) process, a DoD Unified Medical Program budget to provide resources for the
DoD MHS. Consistent with applicable law, accounts for all funding for the DoD MHS,
including operations and maintenance; procurement; and research, development, test, and
evaluation in the single Defense Health Program (DHP) appropriations account, but keeps funds
for medical facility military construction in a separate single appropriations account.

         (b) Presents and justifies the DoD Unified Medical Program budget throughout the
PPBE process, including representations before Congress.

       (5) Serves as principal advisor to the Secretary of Defense, USD(P&R), and
USD(AT&L) for the clinical health care and health surveillance aspects of DoD chemical,
biological, radiological, nuclear, and explosive (CBRNE) medical defense programs.
Coordinates policy and provides program oversight related to the use of preventive and
therapeutic medical countermeasures to CBRNE threats, including all immunizations policy.




Change 1, 08/10/2017                            2
                                                                DoDD 5136.01, September 30, 2013


Serves as subject matter expert for congressional inquiries on health issues related to medical
countermeasures and represents the Secretary of Defense on these matters outside the DoD.

        (6) Serves as the principal advisor to the Secretary of Defense and USD(P&R) on
deployment matters as they pertain to force health protection and readiness in the DoD, including
the medical aspects of global health engagement, health policy, medical readiness, and medical
research and development. Develops policies and provides oversight for new or improved force
health protection initiatives and supports the investigation, information exchange, measurement,
reporting, and archiving of pertinent health-related information on past, present, or potential
military deployments.

        (7) In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, develops:

           (a) Medical standards for appointment, enlistment, and induction into the Military
Services under the jurisdiction of the DoD.

            (b) Policies, standards, and procedures for mental health evaluations and treatment,
combat stress control, and comprehensive health surveillance.

             (c) Policies for retention and separation or retirement for physical disability or
health-related conditions, as prescribed in chapter 61 of Reference (a) and DoDI 1332.18
(Reference (d)).

       (8) Serves on the Research and Engineering Executive Committee to advise the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (ASD(R&E)) on matters related to medical
research and development.

       (9) Exercises authority, in accordance with section 300hh-11 of Title 42, U.S.C.
(Reference (e)) and develops DoD policy for participation in the National Disaster Medical
System.

       (10) Develops policies and standards to ensure effective and efficient results through the
approved joint processes for medical capabilities integration, clinical standardization, and
operational validation of all medical materiel.

        (11) Develops and manages an MHS-wide strategic management program and
organizational improvement measures that demonstrate value across the MHS enterprise, and
ensures the DoD Components of the MHS are attentive and responsive to the requirements of
their organizational customers, both internal and external to DoD.

       (12) Develops policies and procedures and oversees implementation and execution of
programs to support wounded, ill, and injured Service members and their families. Ensures
programs and policies meet the evolving and longitudinal care and transition needs of the
wounded, ill, and injured and are coordinated among other Executive branch departments,
including the Department of Veterans Affairs.




Change 1, 08/10/2017                               3
                                                               DoDD 5136.01, September 30, 2013


       (13) Develops policies and standards and provides oversight for DoD IDES functions.
Advises the Secretary of Defense and USD(P&R) on matters related to IDES. Coordinates, as
appropriate, on IDES matters with the Department of Veterans Affairs.

       (14) Serves as the principal advisor to the USD(P&R) and the Director of the Joint Staff
to develop and review functional strategies for all DoD health and medical information
technology capabilities.

        (15) Serves on boards, committees, and other groups pertaining to assigned functional
areas and represents the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P&R) outside DoD on matters
concerning assigned responsibilities, in coordination with other OSD officials, as appropriate or
directed in other DoD policies.

        (16) Performs such other duties as the Secretary of Defense and USD(P&R) may
prescribe.

   b. The ASD(HA) may not direct a change in the structure of the chain of command within a
Military Department or with respect to medical personnel assigned to that command.


4. RELATIONSHIPS

    a. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), in the performance of
assigned responsibilities and functions, the ASD(HA):

       (1) Reports directly to the USD(P&R).

       (2) Exercises authority, direction, and control over:

           (a) The Director, Defense Health Agency.

           (b) The President, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences.

           (c) Any other subordinate officials that may be assigned or other organizations that
may be established by the ASD(HA), within resources assigned by the Secretary of Defense.

       (3) As the principal advisor for health matters under the USD(P&R), coordinates, as
appropriate, with:

            (a) The Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO), and the Director of Cost Analysis and Program
Evaluation to integrate medical PPBE activities with the DoD PPBE process, to include
development and use of the DoD analytical process. The ASD(HA), in accordance with
applicable law, instructs the USD(C)/CFO on the allocation and reallocation of the funds in the
DHP account and the medical facility military construction account.




Change 1, 08/10/2017                            4
                                                            DoDD 5136.01, September 30, 2013


            (b) The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low Intensity
Conflict, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Global Strategic Affairs, and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Homeland Defense and Americas’ Security Affairs, under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(P), on relevant medical policies and program activities to ensure they are integrated and
consistent with existing DoD policy and programs.

            (c) The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological
Defense Programs, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, and ASD(R&E), under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), on matters pertaining to medical research,
development, and acquisition. Specifically, coordinate on issues concerning medical
countermeasures to CBRNE threats, the research, development, acquisition, and use of such
products, and the incorporation of relevant data from chemical and biological defense equipment
to inform comprehensive human health surveillance. Work to assure effective integration of the
CBRNE defense program and CBRNE medical defense program, in coordination with the
Secretary of the Army as the DoD Executive Agent for the DoD Immunization Program for
Biological Warfare Defense, in accordance with DoDD 6205.3 (Reference (f)), and other
cognizant officials.

            (d) The DoD Chief Information Officer, the USD(AT&L), the USD(C)/CFO, and the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, along with the Warfighting Mission Area leads, to
collaboratively develop additional guidance for integration of information technology portfolio
management activities into the processes governed by Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Instruction 3170.01E (Reference (g)), DoDD 7045.14 (Reference (h)), DoDD 5000.01
(Reference (i)), and DoD Instruction (DoDI) 8115.02 (Reference (j)).

           (e) The Department of Veterans Affairs on matters pertaining to responsibilities and
functions assigned to the ASD(HA).

       (4) Obtains submissions of the medical program needs of the Combatant Commanders,
through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Obtains and integrates submissions, as
appropriate, from the Secretaries of the Military Departments of their proposed elements of the
DoD Unified Medical Program and budget.

     (5) Coordinates and exchanges information with other OSD officials, the DoD
Component heads, and federal officials with collateral or related functions.

      (6) Uses existing systems, facilities, and services of DoD and other federal agencies,
when possible, to avoid duplication and to achieve maximum efficiency and economy.

    b. Other OSD officials and the DoD Component heads will coordinate with the ASD(HA) on
all matters under their purview related to the responsibilities and functions assigned in this
directive.




Change 1, 08/10/2017                            5
                                                             DoDD 5136.01, September 30, 2013


5. AUTHORITIES. The ASD(HA) is delegated authority to:

    a. Approve and sign DoD instructions, DoD manuals, and directive-type memorandums, in
accordance with DoDI 5025.01 (Reference (k)), that implement policy approved by the Secretary
of Defense or the USD(P&R) in assigned areas of responsibility and function. Develop, issue,
and maintain issuances, with the coordination of the Secretaries of the Military Departments, as
necessary and appropriate, to fulfill the Secretary of Defense’s responsibility to administer
chapter 55 of Reference (a) and other statutes governing matters for which this directive assigns
responsibilities and functions to the ASD(HA).

       (1) Assignment of responsibilities in DoD issuances to the Military Departments is to the
Secretaries of those Departments.

       (2) Assignment of responsibilities in DoD issuances to the Combatant Commanders is
coordinated with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

   b. Obtain reports and information, in accordance with DoDI 8910.01 (Reference (l)), as
necessary to perform assigned responsibilities and functions.

    c. Communicate directly with the DoD Component heads, as necessary, to perform assigned
responsibilities and functions, including requests for advice and assistance. Communications to
the Military Departments are transmitted through the Secretaries of the Military Departments, as
otherwise provided in law, or as the Secretary of Defense directs in other DoD issuances.
Communications to the Combatant Commanders will be in accordance with paragraph 4b(3)
above the signature of DoDD 5100.01 (Reference (m)).

  d. Arrange for DoD participation in non-defense governmental programs for which the
ASD(HA) has been assigned primary coordination.

    e. Communicate with other U.S. Government officials, members of the public, and
representatives of foreign governments, as appropriate, in carrying out assigned responsibilities
and functions. Communications with representatives of the Legislative Branch must be
conducted through the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs,
except for communications with the Defense Appropriations Committees, which will be
coordinated with the Office of the USD(C)/CFO and be consistent with the DoD Legislative
Program.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 1, 08/10/2017                            6
                                                       DoDD 5136.01, September 30, 2013


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective September 30, 2013.




                                            Ashton B. Carter
                                            Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosure
   References
Glossary




Change 1, 08/10/2017                       7
                                                             DoDD 5136.01, September 30, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE

                                        REFERENCES

(a) Title 10, United States Code
(b) DoD Directive 5136.1, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA)),”
    June 4, 2008 (hereby cancelled)
(c) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(d) DoD Instruction 1332.18, “Disability Evaluation System (DES),” August 5, 2014, as
    amended
(e) Title 42, United States Code
(f) DoD Directive 6205.3, “DoD Immunization Program for Biological Warfare Defense,”
    November 26, 1993
(g) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3170.01E, “Joint Capabilities Integration
    and Development System,” January 10, 2012
(h) DoD Directive 7045.14, “The Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE)
    Process,” January 25, 2013, as amended
(i) DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003, as amended
(j) DoD Instruction 8115.02, “Information Technology Portfolio Management
    Implementation,” October 30, 2006
(k) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended
(l) DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,” May 19, 2014
(m) DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major
    Components,” December 21, 2010




Change 1, 08/10/2017                            8                          ENCLOSURE
                                                               DoDD 5136.01, September 30, 2013


                                            GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ASD(HA)                Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs
ASD(R&E)               Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering

CBRNE                  chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and explosive

DHP                    Defense Health Program
DoDD                   DoD Directive
DoDI                   DoD Instruction

IDES                   Integrated Disability Evaluation System

MHS                    Military Health System

PPBE                   Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution

U.S.C.                 United States Code
USD(AT&L)              Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(C)/CFO             Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                       Department of Defense
USD(P&R)               Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USD(P)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

Military Services. The United States Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard.

DHP appropriation. A single appropriation, consisting of operation and maintenance; research,
development, test, and evaluation; and procurement funds, designed to finance the non-military
personnel requirements of the MHS.

DoD Components of the MHS. Military Services’ medical departments, the Defense Health
Agency, and other designated agencies or activities.

DoD MHS. DoD medical and dental programs, personnel, facilities, and other assets operating
pursuant to chapter 55 of Reference (a), by which the DoD provides:

   Health care services and support to the Military Services during the range of military
operations.



Change 1, 08/10/2017                              9                          GLOSSARY
                                                             DoDD 5136.01, September 30, 2013



   Health care services and support to members of the Military Services, their family members,
and others entitled to DoD medical care.

DoD Unified Medical Program. A combination of the DHP appropriation, the medical military
construction appropriation, military personnel funds for military personnel supporting the MHS,
and the estimated payments to the DoD Medicare-Eligible Retiree Health Care Fund.

Total Force. The organizations, units, and individuals that comprise DoD resources for
implementing the National Security Strategy. It includes DoD Active and Reserve Component
military personnel, military retired members, DoD civilian personnel (including foreign national
direct- and indirect-hire, as well as non-appropriated fund employees), contractor personnel, and
host-nation support personnel.

TRICARE. The DoD medical and dental programs operating pursuant to chapter 55 of
Reference (a), under which medical and dental services are provided to DoD health care
beneficiaries. The term includes all activities described in the definition of the term “TRICARE
Program” in section 1072(7) of Reference (a).




Change 1, 08/10/2017                           10                            GLOSSARY
