                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 3025.14
                                                                              February 26, 2013
                                                     Incorporating Change 1, November 30, 2017

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Evacuation of U.S. Citizens and Designated Aliens from Threatened Areas Abroad

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 3025.14 (Reference (a)) to update
policy and responsibilities for the evacuation of U.S. citizens and designated aliens from
threatened areas abroad, in accordance with Executive Order 12656 (Reference (b)) and the
memorandum of agreement between the Departments of State (DOS) and Defense (Reference
(c)). This directive also cancels the designation of the Secretary of Army as Executive Agent for
the repatriation of DoD noncombatants.


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to
collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. In the event of an emergency abroad affecting the safety of U.S. citizens, DoD will
support the Secretary of State’s overall formal responsibility to:

       (1) Protect U.S. citizens and nationals, and designated other persons, to include when
necessary and feasible their evacuation to and welfare in relatively safe areas.

       (2) Reduce to a minimum the number of U.S. citizens and nationals, and designated
other persons, subject to the risk of death, harmful health exposures, or seizure as hostages.

        (3) Reduce to a minimum the number of U.S. citizens and nationals, and designated
other persons, in probable or actual combat areas so that the combat effectiveness of U.S. and
allied forces is not impaired.
                                                                DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013



    b. DoD has primary responsibility for preparing and ordering the execution of plans for the
protection and evacuation of all noncombatant U.S. citizens and nationals, and designated other
persons, in the U.S. Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

    c. In conjunction with the Secretary of State, DoD will prepare and implement plans for the
protection, evacuation, and repatriation of DoD noncombatants in threatened areas abroad;
integrate such plans into DOS’s plans for evacuating non-DoD noncombatants from foreign
countries; and assist the Secretary of State in carrying out those responsibilities where militarily
feasible and when formally requested by the Secretary of State.

    d. As the President’s personal representative to the host country, the Chief of Diplomatic
Mission (COM), or Principal Officer, is the lead federal official for the protection and evacuation
of all U.S. noncombatants, including DoD dependents. Commanders will ensure that DoD
actions relating to the evacuation of DoD dependents, nonessential and essential DoD civilian
employees, and their families, are consistent with the direction of the COM or Principal Officer
of DOS. The authority of the COM or Principal Officer of DOS to order evacuation does not
extend to personnel of the Military Services not under COM authority, except as agreed upon
between DOS and DoD.

    e. The DOS applies the U.S. Government’s “no double standard” policy to important
security threat information. Generally, if information is shared with the official U.S. community,
the same or similar information should also be made available to private U.S. citizens and
nationals, to the extent that the underlying threat also applies to them. If information is issued
about potentially dangerous situations, DOS evaluates whether the potential danger could also
affect private U.S. citizens or nationals living in or traveling through the affected area. The “no
double standard” policy also requires private U.S. citizens be given the same evacuation
opportunities and assistance as those U.S. citizens who are in country for official U.S.
Government purposes, when appropriate and feasible. It is DOS policy to make available to
private U.S. citizens, on a reimbursable basis, any U.S. Government-facilitated evacuation option
planned for the official U.S. Government community, when appropriate and feasible.

    f. DoD will execute the evacuation from threatened areas abroad in close coordination with
the Secretary of State as an integral part of the overall DoD response to the danger or crisis that
precipitates the withdrawal.

    g. Evacuation will generally correspond to protection and evacuation plans established by
DOS as follows. It is important to note that diplomatic or other considerations may make the use
of certain terms, such as “noncombatant evacuation operation” (NEO), inadvisable and require
the use of other terms instead.

        (1) Standfast. All military dependents, nonessential DoD civilian employees and their
families, families of essential DoD civilian employees, and DoD Dependents Schools (DoDDS)
staff and faculty are required to shelter in place and take appropriate precautions to limit harm
since immediate movement will involve unacceptable risks.




Change 1, 11/30/2017                              2
                                                             DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013

        (2) Stop Movement. DoD issues an order to stop forward movement of military
dependents, nonessential DoD civilian employees and their families, families of essential DoD
civilian employees, and DoDDS staff and faculty.

        (3) Authorized Departure. Voluntary departure of command-sponsored military
dependents, nonessential DoD civilian employees and their families, families of essential DoD
civilian employees, and DoDDS staff and faculty to an announced safe haven is encouraged and
authorized at government expense, with return also at government expense. These government
authorized expenses do not apply to local U.S. citizens who do not have service agreements for
return transportation to the United States at government expense.

        (4) Ordered Departure. Mandatory departure of some or all categories of personnel and
dependents (such as military dependents, nonessential DoD civilian employees and their
families, families of essential DoD civilian employees, and DoDDS staff and faculty) to
designated safe havens is directed by DOS, with implementation of the theater evacuation plan.
Historically, DOS accomplishes most ordered evacuations using commercial transportation
(scheduled or chartered), without the use of military personnel or assistance. However, DOS
may request a DoD-assisted NEO (using DoD organic or chartered transportation assets) based
on the nature of the threat or the lack of availability of alternative forms of transportation.

    h. Payments or reimbursements to military dependents, DoD civilians and their families
under authorized or ordered departure must be in accordance with appropriate provisions of the
Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1 (Reference (d)) and the Joint Travel Regulations,
Volume 2 (Reference (e)).

   i. To the extent feasible and practical, DoD will use similar support systems and processes
regardless of the nature of the evacuation (authorized or ordered, regardless of whether NEO has
been declared).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.




Change 1, 11/30/2017                           3
                                                         DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013

7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective February 26, 2013.




                                            Ashton B. Carter
                                            Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 11/30/2017                        4
                                                                         DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013

                                                 ENCLOSURE 1

                                                 REFERENCES


(a)     DoD Directive 3025.14, “Protection and Evacuation of U.S. Citizens and Designated
        Aliens in Danger Areas Abroad (Short Title: Noncombatant Evacuation Operations),”
        November 5, 1990 (hereby cancelled)
(b)     Executive Order 12656, “Assignment of Emergency Preparedness Responsibilities,”
        November 18, 1988
(c)     Memorandum of Agreement between the Departments of State and Defense on the
        Protection and Evacuation of U.S. Citizens and Nationals and Designated Other Persons
        from Threatened Areas Overseas, July 14, 1998 1
(d)     Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1, “Uniformed Service Members,” current
        edition
(e)     Joint Travel Regulations, Volume 2, “Department of Defense Civilian Personnel,” current
        edition
(f)     DoD Directive 7730.65, “Department of Defense Readiness Reporting System (DRRS),”
        May 11, 2015
(g)     DoD Instruction 1342.22, “Military Family Readiness,” July 3, 2012, as amended
(h)     DoD Instruction 3001.02, “Personnel Accountability in Conjunction with Natural or
        Manmade Disasters,” May 3, 2010
(i)     DoD Manual 8910.01, Volumes 1 and 2, “DoD Information Collections Manual,” June 30,
        2014, as amended
(j)     DoD Directive 3020.44, “Defense Crisis Management,” June 4, 2007, as amended
(k)     DoD Manual O-3020.44-M, “OSD Defense Crisis Management (CrM) Procedures,”
        May 19, 2010, as amended
(l)     Section 1535 of Title 31, United States Code
(m)     DoD Directive 5158.04, “United States Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM),”
        July 27, 2007, as amended




1
    Copies may be obtained from the Internet at http://prhome.defense.gov/documents


Change 1, 11/30/2017                                     5                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013

                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R):

    a. Formulates policy for and coordinates evacuation of DoD personnel and dependents from
threatened areas abroad, and provide additional evacuation support as required.

  b. Monitors the readiness of military forces and the supporting infrastructure, as specified in
DoDD 7730.65 (Reference (f)), to execute evacuations.

    c. Appoints a member of the Washington Liaison Group (WLG) to coordinate the execution
of evacuation responsibilities outlined in Reference (c).

   d. After coordination with the DOS, advises the Secretaries of the Military Departments; the
CJCS; the Combatant Commanders; and the heads of any other appropriate DoD Components, to
suspend, if required, the forward movement of DoD noncombatants to any danger area abroad.

    e. Ensures appropriate procedures for evacuation are followed, to include reimbursement of
expenses for the DoD evacuees and uniformity among the Military Departments regarding
entitlements for per diem, travel, and transportation allowances.

  f. Authorizes, extends, and terminates evacuation allowances for DoD eligible family
members and non-emergency civilian personnel.

    g. For DoD eligible family member and non-emergency civilian personnel, approves non-
foreign safe haven requests and obtain DOS authorization on foreign safe haven requests.

    h. After coordination with the DOS, advises the Secretaries of the Military Departments; the
CJCS; the Combatant Commanders; and the heads of any other appropriate DoD Components, to
return DoD evacuees to the sponsor’s duty location, to the duty location from which they
evacuated, or (if return is not authorized) to another location.

   i. Establishes a focal point for evacuation, to include:

       (1) Maintaining a continuing dialogue within DoD as well as with DOS and other
agencies as appropriate on the personnel impacts of crisis management, to include evacuation.

        (2) Convening periodic meetings with the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
(USD(P)) representatives, other DoD organizations, and such other offices as may be considered
necessary, to serve as a forum for recommending evacuation policies and processes, resolving
issues, and developing lessons learned.




Change 1, 11/30/2017                             6                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013

       (3) Providing input to agreements with DOS on evacuation operations.


2. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MILITARY COMMUNITY
AND FAMILY POLICY (DASD(MC&FP)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R) through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs, the
DASD(MC&FP):

   a. Develops policy for emergency family assistance and for the operation of Emergency
Family Assistance Centers as specified in DoDI 1342.22 (Reference (g)).

   b. Operates Military OneSource as the central point of contact for distribution of information
and referral services for Service members, DoD civilian employees, and their families, as
specified in DoDI 3001.02 (Reference (h)).


3. DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE HUMAN RESOURCES ACTIVITY
(DoDHRA). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), the Director,
DoDHRA, ensures that the Director, Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC):

    a. Develops, manages, and maintains automated system(s) to provide accountability,
visibility, and support for evacuees during all phases of evacuation (departure, safe haven
reception, safe haven support, and return).

       (1) Designates automated system(s) for mandatory use by DoD Components in support
of evacuation, and ensures proper training and accountability.

       (2) Serves as lead for facilitating, through a DMDC-contracted vendor as appropriate,
purchases related to those automated system(s) to provide accountability, visibility, and support
for evacuees during all phases of evacuation.

       (3) In developing the automated system(s), considers the internal information
requirements of DoD and processes all information collection requirements in accordance with
the procedures in Volumes 1 and 2 of DoD Manual 8910.01 (Reference (i)). Considers the needs
of DOS and other external agencies that support evacuations.

  b. Serves as the central DoD repository for personnel tracking information collected by the
Components in accordance with Reference (h).


4. USD(P). The USD(P):

    a. Serves as the Principal Staff Assistant and advisor to the Secretary of Defense on defense
crisis management matters, leads the overall defense crisis management response, and ensures
that the information needs and other requirements of the Secretary of Defense are met, as
specified in DoDD 3020.44 (Reference (j)) and DoD O-3020.44-M (Reference (k)).



Change 1, 11/30/2017                            7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013



    b. Coordinates with the USD(P&R) and CJCS staffs, and other U.S. Government
stakeholders as appropriate, in formulating DoD policy and plans in support of DOS-sponsored
evacuations from threatened areas abroad.

    c. Appoints a member of the WLG to coordinate the execution of evacuation responsibilities
outlined in Reference (c).

   d. Receives, coordinates, and recommends actions on formal requests for military assistance
coming from outside DoD.

   e. Ensures a current agreement exists with DOS detailing responsibilities in evacuation
operations.


5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). The USD(C)/CFO:

    a. Establishes financial arrangements with the DOS and issues instructions to the DoD
Components for obtaining reimbursement in accordance with section 1535 of Title 31, United
States Code (Reference (l)) for evacuation costs for which DoD is not responsible, in accordance
with the cost responsibility matrix in Reference (c) and other applicable authorities. In
accordance with this criterion, the expense of evacuating noncombatant U.S. citizens from the
U.S. Naval Base, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba (as established in paragraph 3b above the signature)
would be that of the DoD.

   b. When DOS incurs evacuation expenses for which DoD is responsible, in accordance with
Reference (c) and other applicable authorities, establishes arrangements for the reimbursement of
such costs.


6. ASSISTANT TO THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS (ATSD(PA)).
The ATSD(PA) provides guidance to all DoD Components regarding release of information on
DoD participation in protection and evacuation operations, and ensure coordination with other
federal agencies, as appropriate.


7. DOD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads manage the accountability,
tracking, and reporting of their personnel throughout the evacuation process.


8. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In addition to the responsibilities
in section 7 of this enclosure, the Secretaries of the Military Departments:




Change 1, 11/30/2017                           8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013

   a. Appoint a Military Department member to the WLG to coordinate the execution of
evacuation responsibilities outlined in Reference (c). The Secretary of the Navy may also
appoint a separate member to represent the Marine Corps.

    b. Measure and report on the readiness of military forces and the supporting infrastructure,
as specified in Reference (f), to execute evacuations.

    c. Monitor all Military Department personnel when evacuated to a safe haven, provide for
their needs, and arrange for their return to the evacuated area when safe to do so.

    d. In accordance with Geographic Combatant Commander evacuation plans and policies,
equip forces with automated system(s) to provide accountability, visibility, and support for
evacuees during all phases of evacuation and ensure adequate numbers of personnel are trained
to operate the system(s).


9. SECRETARY OF THE NAVY. In addition to the responsibilities in sections 7 and 8 of this
enclosure, the Secretary of the Navy:

    a. Interprets the requirements of this directive to include the Marine Corps and (if transferred
to Navy) the United States Coast Guard, in addition to the Department of the Navy.

   b. Provides for the designation and training of port liaison officers.

    c. In accordance with the mission and priorities assigned by the United States Transportation
Command (USTRANSCOM), provides military sea transportation for the evacuation of
personnel, as required.


10. SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. In addition to the responsibilities in sections 7 and 8
of this enclosure, the Secretary of the Air Force, in accordance with the mission and priorities
assigned by USTRANSCOM, provides air transportation, including theater, strategic, and intra-
continental United States as well as aeromedical evacuation to support medical evacuation
requirements.


11. CJCS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 7 of this enclosure, the CJCS:

   a. Coordinates the deployment and employment of U.S. military forces in support of
evacuation operations.

    b. Appoints the CJCS representative to the WLG to coordinate the execution of evacuation
responsibilities outlined in Reference (c).

    c. Monitors the Combatant Commanders’ and the Military Services’ readiness for and
participation in protection and evacuation operations.



Change 1, 11/30/2017                             9                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013



    d. Recommends to the Secretary of Defense transportation movement priorities and the use
of USTRANSCOM to provide the appropriate transportation resources in support of DOS
requests.

  e. As a member of the WLG, coordinates with the DOS, the OSD, the Combatant
Commanders, and the Services, as required, in the recommended designation of safe havens.

  f. When conditions of potential hazard warrant, recommends to the USD(P&R) that the
movement of DoD noncombatants into countries or areas be suspended.

   g. Periodically evaluates command procedures for evacuation operations, particularly during
scheduled CJCS exercises.

   h. Performs appropriate tasks identified in section 12 of this enclosure, consistent with
applicable law, for those areas where no Combatant Command has responsibility.


12. GEOGRAPHIC COMBATANT COMMANDERS. In addition to the responsibilities in
section 7 of this enclosure, the Geographic Combatant Commanders:

    a. Coordinate emergency and evacuation planning and execution on a regional basis as
outlined in Reference (c).

    b. Prepare, maintain, exercise, and execute plans for protection and evacuation from
threatened areas abroad in accordance with Reference (c), to include both their departure from
the overseas area and their reception at a safe haven.

    c. Assist the COM(s) and Principal Officer(s) in the preparation of embassy emergency
action plans. Ensure that those plans comply with the following criteria:

      (1) Adequate provisions are made for the protection and evacuation of all DoD
noncombatants and, when appropriate, military personnel.

       (2) Assumptions based on the use of DoD resources are militarily acceptable and in
accordance with Reference (c).

       (3) References to U.S. military facilities are accurate.

       (4) Plans provide required information should assistance by the U.S. military be
requested.

       (5) Plans are properly distributed to subordinate and adjacent military commands.

        (6) Plans are reviewed annually and periodically evaluated for procedures and
effectiveness.



Change 1, 11/30/2017                            10                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013



    d. Measure and report on the readiness of military forces and the supporting infrastructure,
as specified in Reference (f), to execute evacuations.

    e. When conditions of potential hazard warrant, recommend to the CJCS that the movement
of DoD noncombatants into countries or areas be suspended. Also, recommend evacuation of
DoD noncombatants if conditions warrant.

    f. If time prevents communication with DOS or DoD and upon request of the COM, provide
such assistance as is feasible for the protection and evacuation of U.S. noncombatants. In
accordance with Reference (c), if timely communication with the COM is not possible, the U.S.
military commander will take the proper action and promptly notify the COM of action taken.


13. COMMANDER, USTRANSCOM. In addition to the responsibilities in section 7 of this
enclosure, the Commander, USTRANSCOM, provides air, sea, and land transportation, terminal
operations, and patient movement in accordance with DoDD 5158.04 (Reference (m)).




Change 1, 11/30/2017                            11                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013

                                            GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 ASD(PA)             Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs


 CJCS                Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
 COM                 Chief of Diplomatic Mission


 DASD(MC&FP) Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Community and
             Family Policy
 DMDC        Defense Manpower Data Center
 DoDD        DoD Directive
 DoDDS       DoD Dependents Schools
 DoDHRA      Department of Defense Human Resources Activity
 DoDI        DoD Instruction
 DOS         Department of State


 NEO                 noncombatant evacuation operation


 USD(C)/CFO Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
            Department of Defense
 USD(P)     Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
 USD(P&R)   Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
 USTRANSCOM United States Transportation Command


 WLG                 Washington Liaison Group


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

abroad. In a foreign area; outside the United States, its territories, or possessions.

evacuation. Withdrawal from a threatened area. Evacuation normally consists of four phases:

    Departure (whether authorized or ordered; may or may not include transportation provided or
arranged by the U.S. Government; includes but is not limited to NEO).



Change 1, 11/30/2017                              12                                     GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013



   Safe haven reception (repatriation, if at a U.S. location).

   Safe haven support.

   Return to the evacuated area.

noncombatants:

   U.S. citizens who may be ordered to evacuate by competent authority include:

       Civilian employees of U.S. Government agencies and their dependents, except civilian
employees of U.S. Government agencies and their dependents, who are legal residents in the
country concerned, but have expressed the willingness to be evacuated.

      Military personnel of the U.S. Military Services specifically designated for evacuation as
noncombatants.

       Dependents of members of the U.S. Military Services.

   U.S. (and non-U.S.) citizens who may be authorized or assisted in evacuation (but not
necessarily ordered to evacuate) by competent authority include:

       Civilian employees of U.S. Government agencies and their dependents, who are legal
residents in the country concerned, but have expressed the willingness to be evacuated.

       Private U.S. citizens and their dependents. (Note: Private U.S. citizens cannot be
ordered to evacuate.)

       Military personnel and dependents of members of the U.S. Armed Forces outlined in
subparagraph a(3), short of an ordered evacuation.

        Designated others, including dependents of civilian employees of U.S. Government
agencies and their dependents, except civilian employees of U.S. Government agencies and their
dependents, who are legal residents in the country concerned, but have expressed the willingness
to be evacuated; military personnel of the U.S. Military Services specifically designated for
evacuation as noncombatants; and dependents of members of the U.S. Military Services, as
prescribed by DOS.

NEO. As used by DOS, an ordered departure from a threatened area abroad that is carried out
with the assistance of DoD (as opposed to ordered departures that do not require DoD assistance
but are carried out using commercial or chartered transportation). DOS may declare a NEO
based on the nature of the threat or the lack of availability of alternative forms of transportation.
It is important to note that diplomatic or other considerations may make use of certain terms
(such as “NEO”) inadvisable and require the use of other terms instead.




Change 1, 11/30/2017                             13                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDD 3025.14, February 26, 2013

repatriation. The procedure whereby U.S. citizens and their families are officially processed
back into the United States subsequent to an evacuation. Evacuees are also provided various
services to ensure their well-being and onward movement to their final destination.

safe haven. Designated area(s) to which noncombatants under the U.S. Government’s
responsibility may be evacuated during an emergency. A location within or outside the United
States to which noncombatants are authorized to travel for the purpose of temporarily remaining
there until they are authorized to return to the location from which evacuated, or until they are
authorized to travel to their final destination. Safe havens are normally designated by DOS, in
coordination with DoD.

threatened areas. Includes areas facing actual or potential danger from natural or manmade
disaster, civil unrest, imminent or actual terrorist activities, hostilities, and similar circumstances,
as declared by competent authority.

WLG. An organization consisting of members of DOS, DoD, and other relevant agencies,
chaired by a representative of DOS, which has basic responsibility for the coordination and
implementation of plans for the protection and evacuation in emergencies of persons abroad for
whom the Secretaries of State or Defense are responsible. The representatives on the WLG are
the points of contact for their departments on all matters pertaining to emergency evacuation
planning, implementation of plans, and coordination of repatriation activities with the
Department of Health and Human Services.




Change 1, 11/30/2017                              14                                     GLOSSARY
