                              Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 1322.08E
                                                                                   January 3, 2005
                                                             Certified Current as of April 23, 2007

                                                                                        USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Voluntary Education Programs for Military Personnel

References: (a) DoD Directive 1322.8, subject as above, January 6, 1997(hereby
                canceled)
            (b) Section 2005 of title 10, United States Code
            (c) Section 2007 of title 10, United States Code
            (d) DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agency,” September 9,
                2002


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive:

   1.1. Reissues reference (a) to update policy and responsibilities for voluntary education
programs for military personnel.

   1.2. Implements references (b) and (c).

   1.3. Designates the Secretary of the Navy as the DoD Executive Agent for the Defense
Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support (DANTES) in accordance with reference (d).

2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all
other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as
the "DoD Components"). The term “Military Services,” as used herein refers to the Army, the
Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.




                                                 1
                                                              DoDD 1322.08E, January 3, 2005


3. DEFINITIONS

    3.1. Adult Education. Services or instructions below the college level for adults who lack
sufficient mastery of basic educational skills (English, reading, writing, speaking, and
mathematics) to enable them to function effectively in society.

   3.2. Distance Education. The delivery of education or training through electronically
mediated instruction, including satellite, video, audiographic, computer, multimedia technology,
and other forms of learning at a distance, such as correspondence and independent study.

    3.3. Off-Duty Time. Time spent when Service members are not scheduled to perform
official duties.

   3.4. Tuition Assistance. Funds provided by the Military Services to pay a percentage of the
charges of an educational institution for the tuition of an active duty member of the Armed
Forces enrolled in courses of study during his or her off-duty time.

   3.5. Voluntary Education Programs. Continuing, adult, or postsecondary educational
programs of study that Service members elect to participate during their off-duty time.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy, under references (b) and (c), that:

    4.1. Programs shall be established and maintained in the Department of Defense that provide
Service members with educational opportunities that they may participate voluntarily during
their off-duty time or at such other times as authorized by Military Services’ policies.

    4.2. Voluntary education programs shall provide educational opportunities comparable to
those available to citizens outside the military, be available to all active duty personnel
regardless of their duty location, and include courses and services provided by accredited
postsecondary vocational and technical schools, colleges, and universities. Programs may be
provided as traditional classroom instruction or through distance education.

   4.3. Tuition Assistance, as authorized by reference (b), shall be provided for Service
members that participate in voluntary education programs. The amount of monetary support
available to each Service member shall be uniform across the Military Services.

    4.4. Service members interested in participating in voluntary education programs shall be
provided guidance and counseling services by qualified personnel so they can make the most
efficient use of Government resources and the most effective use of their own time, money, and
effort.




                                                  2
                                                                DoDD 1322.08E, January 3, 2005


    4.5. Service members shall be provided opportunities to acquire basic educational and
academic skills which are essential to successful job performance and new learning. In
accordance with reference (c), in locations outside the United States adult education programs
shall be available to both Service members and their adult family members.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

   5.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), shall:

      5.1.1. Develop overall policy guidance for voluntary education programs in the
Department of Defense.

       5.1.2. Monitor compliance with this Directive.

       5.1.3. Exercise policy control over the DANTES.

         5.1.4. Maintain liaison with Federal and State Agencies and with national organizations
that influence educational policies and practices.

  5.2. The Secretary of the Navy is hereby designated as the DoD Executive Agent for the
DANTES and in that role shall:

       5.2.1. Provide the DANTES with adequate resources, facilities and logistical support.

     5.2.2. Support the DANTES, consistent with the policy guidance issued by the
USD(P&R).

    5.3. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs, under the USD(P&R), shall
establish procedures to ensure that members of the Reserve components are informed of
opportunities available to them through the DoD voluntary education programs.

   5.4. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

      5.4.1. Maintain voluntary education programs for Service members by providing
worldwide staff, resources, facilities, and funding, consistent with this Directive and applicable
DoD Instructions.

        5.4.2. Issue policy guidance governing the conduct of educational programs to comply
with this Directive, applicable DoD Instructions, and the needs of the Military Services.

       5.4.3. Maintain liaison with Federal and State Agencies, and with national education
associations, as necessary.




                                                 3
                                               DoDD 1322.08E, January 3, 2005


6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




                                           4
