                                   Department of Defense
                                         DIRECTIVE

                                                                                NUMBER 5134.13
                                                                                  October 5, 2005

                                                                                             DA&M


SUBJECT: Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology (DUSD(A&T))

References: (a) Sections 113 and 133a of title 10, United States Code
            (b) DoD Directive 5134.13, “Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition
                and Technology (DUSD(A&T)),” May 25, 2000 (hereby canceled)
            (c) DoD Directive 5134.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
                Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” April 21, 2000
            (d) DoD 5025.1-M, “DoD Directives System Procedures,” current edition
            (e) DoD Directive 8910.1, “Management and Control of Information
                Requirements,” June 11, 1993


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by reference (a), this Directive
reissues reference (b) to update the responsibilities, functions, relationships, and authorities of
the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology (DUSD(A&T)), under
the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)),
consistent with reference (c).


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military
Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of
the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred
to collectively as the “DoD Components”).
                                                                            DoDD 5134.13, October 5, 2005



3. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS

The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology is a principal advisor to
the USD(AT&L) and the Secretary of Defense for matters relating to acquisition and the
integration and protection of technology. In this capacity, the DUSD(A&T) shall:

   3.1. Oversee policies and procedures governing the DoD Acquisition System.

    3.2. Coordinate, as appropriate, policies for developmental test and evaluation (T&E) with
the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation, and policies and procedures affecting DoD T&E
facilities and resources with the Director, DoD Test Resource Management Center.

   3.3. Oversee programs to improve and strengthen DoD Component technology access and
development programs, and encourage open market competition to gain increased military
capabilities at lower cost, with streamlined fielding times.

   3.4. Oversee the policies for property, plant, and equipment of the Department of Defense
and its plans for property accountability systems, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of
Defense (Comptroller), as applicable.

   3.5. Oversee the development, implementation, and management of the Defense
Procurement Program.

   3.6. Ensure compliance with applicable laws and DoD regulations relating to Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization.

    3.7. Develop policies and programs that improve, streamline, and strengthen the application
of sound systems engineering practices in all DoD acquisition programs.

    3.8. Develop and lead key initiatives involving the integration of weapons systems and
platforms into integrated capability architectures, in a system-of-systems approach, consistent
with applicable DoD information technology policies.

    3.9. Identify any impact on national security and on the defense industrial base of a proposed
foreign acquisition of a U.S. defense supplier, specifically addressing whether the firm being
acquired possesses critical defense technology under development or is otherwise important to
the defense industrial and technology base; and advise the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
(USD(P)), through the USD(AT&L), of these technology and industrial base findings and any
related national security impacts.

    3.10. Supervise and direct those activities under the responsibility of the USD(AT&L)
relating to technology transfer, including cooperative research and development, international
cooperation, technological aspects of security cooperation and export controls, and technology
security.




                                            2
                                                                            DoDD 5134.13, October 5, 2005



   3.11. Provide advice to the USD(P), and, when requested, to the Under Secretary of State for
Arms Control and International Security and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Industry and
Security, on technological aspects of technology transfer, security cooperation, export controls,
and technology security.

   3.12. Supervise and direct the Militarily Critical Technology Program.

    3.13. Support the Defense Business Systems Management Committee in carrying out its
duties to coordinate business transformation and system modernization through transition
planning, and the development and deployment of a business enterprise architecture that guides,
constrains, and permits implementation of interoperable defense business system solutions.

    3.14. Participate in the DoD Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution process with
respect to assigned areas of responsibilities.

   3.15. Ensure that acquisition and technology policies and programs are designed and
managed to improve standards of performance, economy, and efficiency and that the Defense
Contract Management Agency is attentive and responsive to the requirements of its
organizational customers, both internal and external to the Department of Defense.

    3.16. Perform such other duties as the Secretary of Defense or the USD(AT&L) may
prescribe.


4. RELATIONSHIPS

   4.1. In the performance of assigned responsibilities and functions, the DUSD(A&T) shall:

       4.1.1. Report directly to the USD(AT&L).

       4.1.2. Exercise authority, direction, and control over:

           4.1.2.1. The Director, Defense Contract Management Agency

           4.1.2.2. The Director, Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization

           4.1.2.3. Such other organizations as are, or may be, established by the USD(AT&L)
under the DUSD(A&T), consistent with applicable law, within resources provided by the
Secretary of Defense.

        4.1.3. Use existing systems, facilities, and services of the Department of Defense and
other Federal Agencies, when practicable, to avoid duplication and to achieve maximum
efficiency and economy.

        4.1.4. Coordinate and exchange information with the other OSD officials and the Heads
of the DoD Components having collateral or related responsibilities and functions.

                                            3
                                                                            DoDD 5134.13, October 5, 2005




    4.2. The other OSD officials and the Heads of the DoD Components shall coordinate with
the DUSD(A&T) on all matters related to the authorities, responsibilities, and functions assigned
in this Directive.


5. AUTHORITIES

The DUSD(A&T) is hereby delegated authority to:

    5.1. Issue DoD Instructions, DoD Publications, and one-time directive-type memoranda,
consistent with DoD 5025.1-M (reference (d)), that implement policy approved by the Secretary
of Defense or the USD(AT&L) in areas of assigned responsibilities and functions. Instructions
to the Military Departments shall be issued through the Secretaries of the Military Departments.
Instructions to the Combatant Commands normally shall be communicated through the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

   5.2. Obtain reports and information, consistent with DoD Directive 8910.1 (reference (e)), as
necessary in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions.

    5.3. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry
out assigned responsibilities and functions, including the transmission of requests for advice and
assistance. Communications to the Military Departments shall be through the Secretaries of the
Military Departments, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law or directed by the
Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the Commanders of the
Combatant Commands normally shall be transmitted through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.

    5.4. Establish arrangements for DoD participation in non-Defense governmental programs
for which the DUSD(A&T) is assigned primary staff cognizance.

    5.5. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the Legislative
Branch, members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments, as appropriate, in
carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with representatives of the
Legislative Branch shall be coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative
Affairs and be consistent with the DoD Legislative Program.




                                            4
                                               DoDD 5134.13, October 5, 2005



6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




                                           5
