                          Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 1430.02
                                                                               April 6, 2006

                                                                                     USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Civilian Career Management

References: (a) DoD Directive 1430.2, “Civilian Career Management,” June 13, 1981
                (hereby canceled)
            (b) Acting Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DoD Directives Review
                - Phase II,” July 13, 2005
            (c) DoD Directive 5124.2, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness USD(P&R)),” February 11, 2006
            (d) Section 1402 of title 5, United States Code
            (e) DoD Directive 5000.52, “Defense Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
                Workforce Education, Training, and Career Development Program,”
                January 12, 2005


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction:

   1.1. Reissues Reference (a) as a DoD Instruction according to the guidance in Reference (b)
and the authority in Reference (c).

     1.2. Establishes and implements policy and assigns responsibility for the development and
operation of civilian career programs in the Department of Defense consistent with Reference
(d).

   1.2. Updates organizational and title changes made within the Office of the Secretary of
Defense.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

    2.1. This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of
the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
                                                                        DoDI 1430.02, April 6, 2006

Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

   2.2. This Instruction does not apply to those civilian career programs covered under DoD
Directive 5000.52 (Reference (e)).


3. POLICY

It is DoD policy to promote career planning and development to:

     3.1. Ensure a steady flow of capable, fully qualified, and trained personnel to fill positions at
all levels with requisite competence required for success in accomplishing the DoD mission.

    3.2. Promote interest in long-term career opportunities and development, consistent with
current policy for a flexible and adaptable workforce.

   3.3. Retain competent civilian employees and reduce turnover by providing opportunities for
advancement commensurate with their abilities.

   3.4. Develop personnel with knowledge in joint matters and an enterprise-wide perspective.

   3.5. Provide developmental assignments across Components and other Federal and non-
Federal agencies for aspiring career leaders to develop requisite competencies.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

   4.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)) shall:

       4.1.1. Provide overall guidance and policy direction for DoD civilian career programs.

        4.1.2. Coordinate development and evaluate the effectiveness of civilian career programs
in the Department of Defense.

     4.1.3. Establish DoD-wide civilian career programs in coordination with DoD
Components.

        4.1.4. Assign responsibility for developing particular DoD-wide civilian career programs
or portions thereof to individual DoD Components.

       4.1.5. Provide staff guidance to DoD Components in connection with their
responsibilities for DoD-wide civilian career programs.




                                                  2
                                                                         DoDI 1430.02, April 6, 2006

        4.1.6. Issue such manuals, forms, and other publications as may be required for general
policies, requirements, and procedures applicable to the development and operation of DoD-wide
civilian career programs.

       4.1.7. Provide for automating the central inventory and referral systems and the
operation of such systems.

   4.2. The Heads of DoD Components shall:

        4.2.1. Promote the establishment and development of civilian career programs for those
career fields within their respective areas of responsibility when such programs are necessary to
further the most efficient use of human resources.

       4.2.2. Recommend to the USD(P&R), any career fields within their respective areas of
responsibility that require the establishment of a DoD-wide civilian career program.

       4.2.3. Assist the USD(P&R) in career program development and implementation by
providing top management functional leadership.

        4.2.4. Monitor the effectiveness of DoD-wide civilian programs that are operational for
career fields within their areas of responsibility.

        4.2.5. Delegate all or part of the responsibilities in this section to the lowest practical
level that best meets organizational and operational needs.

        4.2.6. Coordinate overall civilian career planning within their respective Components,
including the development (within the policies and standards established by the USD(P&R)) of
programs not covered by DoD-wide programs, and evaluate the implementation of civilian
career programs through on-site inspections and other appropriate means.

       4.2.7. Designate a key official to assist the USD(P&R) in planning and evaluating DoD-
wide civilian career programs, and provide Component-level top management leadership and
coordination.

       4.2.8. Implement DoD-wide civilian career programs within their respective Component.

       4.2.9. Ensure that line management fulfills its basic responsibility of meeting career
management needs through the establishment, operation, maintenance, and evaluation of training
programs in career management functional areas.

        4.2.10. Delegate all or part of the responsibilities in this section to the lowest practical
level that best meets organizational and operational needs.




                                                   3
                                                                    DoDI 1430.02, April 6, 2006



5. PROCEDURES

Civilian career programs shall be developed for occupational specialties employed by such
functional areas as supply, finance, research and development, and other appropriate groupings.
For each occupational specialty or other appropriate grouping, career programs shall include as a
minimum the following elements:

   5.1. Clear lines of progression to successively more responsible duties.

   5.2. Defined core competencies within functional specialties around which all learning and
development should occur.

   5.3. Use of coaching, mentoring, and other actions to promote interest, development, and
profession in career programs.

    5.4. A coordinated training and development program for the occupational specialty, using
in-service and non-Federal facilities to improve present performance and prepare employees for
greater responsibilities. Such a program shall include a specific plan for the use of leading
management training courses available in-house and at facilities outside the Department of
Defense.

   5.5. Provisions for a minimum annual intake of carefully selected career personnel with
potential for progression to more responsible technical, professional, and administrative
positions. A minimum annual intake in each occupational specialty is essential to ensure a
continued flow of persons capable of benefiting from long-term career development programs.

    5.6. Planned work assignments designed to developed managerial, supervisory, and
technical competence.

    5.7. Programs of cross-training between installations and among the DoD Components shall
be fostered through rotational assignments and exchanges of personnel for specified periods.

    5.8. Procedures for referral of suitable personnel for career development opportunities on an
installation or activity, command, DoD Component, and DoD-wide basis.

   5.9. Procedures for counseling employees and appraising employee potential.




                                                4
                                                 DoDI 1430.02, April 6, 2006




6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




                                             5
