                            Department of Defense
                               DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 5505.06
                                                                                    June 6, 2013
                                                 Incorporating Change 1, Effective April 28, 2020

                                                                                           IG DoD

SUBJECT:      Investigations of Allegations Against Senior DoD Officials

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5505.06 (Reference (a)) to
establish policy and assign responsibilities for reporting and investigating allegations of
misconduct against senior DoD officials in accordance with the appendix to Title 5, United
States Code (also known as the “Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended,”) and DoDD
5106.01 (References (b) and (c)).


2. APPLICABILITY

    a. This directive applies to the OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the
Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this
directive as the “DoD Components”).

    b. Nothing in this directive will affect the authority of the DoD Component heads to initiate
inquiries or investigations into matters pertaining to their Component and to determine the nature
and severity of disciplinary or administrative action in particular cases, consistent with DoD
5500.07-R (Reference (d)) and DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5505.03 (Reference (e)) or other
applicable laws, rules, and regulations. However, DoD Components will not initiate an
investigation into such allegations against senior officials without first reporting the allegations
as required and then coordinating with IG DoD.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Allegations of misconduct against senior officials will be reported to the IG DoD within 5
workdays of receipt by a DoD Component. Except in unusual circumstances, the IG DoD will
notify the appropriate DoD Component or Components when an investigation is initiated.
                                                                     DoDD 5505.06, June 6, 2013


Allegations of misconduct against senior officials will be vigorously investigated by appropriate
investigative organizations.

    b. Allegations that a senior official personally participated in discrimination cognizable
under an applicable DoD Component regulation are matters of concern to the Secretary of
Defense and will be reported to the IG DoD in accordance with section 2 of Enclosure 2 of this
directive. Ordinarily, inspector general organizations defer to the investigative process
contemplated by the applicable DoD Component regulation. This provision does not preclude
the IG DoD from conducting or directing the conduct of an investigation of allegations when the
IG DoD deems such action necessary.

   c. Adjudicative bodies investigating allegations against senior officials shall provide the IG
DoD a report of determinations and notice of remedies and disciplinary or corrective actions
within 5 workdays of such action being taken.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance updates references and removes
expiration language in accordance with current Chief Management Officer of the Department of
Defense direction.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective June 6, 2013.




                                                 Ashton B. Carter
                                                 Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 04/28/2020                            2
                                                                  DoDD 5505.06, June 6, 2013


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5505.06, “Investigations of Allegations Against Senior Officials of the
      Department of Defense,” April 10, 2006, as amended (hereby cancelled)
(b)   Appendix to Title 5, United States Code (also known as the “Inspector General Act of
      1978, as amended”)
(c)   DoD Directive 5106.01, “Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD),”
      April 20, 2012, as amended
(d)   DoD 5500.07-R, “Joint Ethics Regulation (JER),” August 1, 1993, as amended
(e)   DoD Instruction 5505.03, “Initiation of Investigations by Defense Criminal Investigative
      Organizations,” March 24, 2011, as amended
(f)   DoD Instruction 5505.02, “Criminal Investigations of Fraud Offenses,” August 29, 2013, as
      amended
(g)   DoD Instruction 5505.16, “Investigations by DoD Components,” June 23, 2017
(h)   Chapter 47 of Title 10, United States Code (also known as “The Uniform Code of Military
      Justice (UCMJ)”)




Change 1, 04/28/2020                           3                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                      DoDD 5505.06, June 6, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. IG DoD. The IG DoD:

    a. Receives reports of allegations of misconduct made against senior officials. If the
notification involves a military officer who has been nominated for promotion, IG DoD notifies
the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness.

    b. Notifies the appropriate DoD Component(s) if an investigation is opened by the IG DoD
on a senior official of the Component(s), subject to paragraph 1f of this enclosure. Provides
results of the investigation to the appropriate DoD Component.

    c. Notifies the appropriate Military Department in the case of senior military officials
assigned to a billet outside of their Department, subject to paragraph 1f of this enclosure.
Provides results of the investigation to the appropriate Military Department.

    d. Provides oversight, as the IG DoD deems appropriate, on investigations conducted by the
other DoD Components into allegations against senior officials.

   e. Notifies the Secretary of Defense of allegations or investigations involving:

       (1) Presidential appointees.

       (2) Others that can reasonably be expected to be of significance.

    f. May dispense with the notifications described in paragraphs 1b and 1c and instead notify
the Secretary of Defense, if the IG DoD determines in a particular case that investigative needs
do not permit these notifications.

    g. Establishes necessary controls to limit access to information covered by this directive. To
the extent authorized by law, regulation, and policy these controls:

       (1) Protect the identity of witnesses and other persons involved in investigations.

        (2) Protect the confidentiality and sensitivity of materials obtained during the
investigative process.

       (3) Ensure that information covered by this directive is handled to avoid unauthorized
disclosure.




Change 1, 04/28/2020                             4                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDD 5505.06, June 6, 2013


2. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

    a. Report allegations of misconduct made against senior officials of the reporting
Component or other Components to the IG DoD within 5 workdays of receipt. The notification
is made in writing and includes:

       (1) The name, rank or grade, and duty position of the senior official involved.

       (2) A synopsis of the allegations.

       (3) The date allegations of misconduct were received by the Component.

       (4) A copy of the incoming complaint.

       (5) The name and position of the point of contact within the Component.

   b. Unless notified that the IG DoD assumes investigative responsibility for a particular
matter, initiate an investigation into the issues raised in the allegation.

   c. Upon request from the IG DoD, provide the status, scope, findings to date, and expected
completion date of the investigation.

   d. Provide a copy of the report of the investigation and supporting documentation to the
IG DoD within 5 workdays of completion of the investigation.

   e. Provide to the IG DoD a written report of any disciplinary or administrative action, taken
against a senior official within 5 workdays after such action is taken.

    f. Ensure that allegations of criminal misconduct are referred to the appropriate criminal
investigative organization consistent with Reference (e), DoDI 5505.02 (Reference (f)), and
DoDI 5505.16 (Reference (g)).




Change 1, 04/28/2020                            5                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDD 5505.06, June 6, 2013


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

DoDD       DoD directive
DoDI       DoD instruction
IG DoD     Inspector General of the Department of Defense


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

allegations of misconduct. A credible allegation that, if proven, would constitute:

   A violation of a provision of criminal law, including chapter 47 of title 10, United States
Code (also known as “The Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ)”) (Reference (h)).

   A violation of a recognized standard such as Reference (d), or other federal, DoD, or Service
regulations.

    Any other conduct of concern to DoD leadership or that could reasonably be expected to be
of significance to the Secretary of Defense, especially when there is an element of misuse of
position or of unauthorized personal benefit to the senior official, a family member, or an
associate.

investigation. Any investigative work conducted to address allegations against senior officials,
beyond the initial review of an allegation to determine whether it meets the definition of
misconduct. The term “investigation” as used in this directive:

    Includes full investigations, as well as preliminary inquiries, complaint analyses, and other
investigative activities that may be employed by DoD Components to establish the scope of
investigative work warranted or, alternatively, to conclude that further investigation is not
warranted.

   Does not include initial reviews of standards that may apply to the allegations or
communications with the complainant to clarify an allegation.

senior official

   An active duty, retired, Reserve, or National Guard military officer in grades O-7 and above,
and an officer selected for promotion to O-7 whose name is on the O-7 promotion board report
forwarded to the Military Department Secretary.

    A current or former member of the Senior Executive Service.


Change 1, 04/28/2020                              6                           GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 5505.06, June 6, 2013



   A current or former DoD civilian employee whose position is deemed equivalent to that of a
member of the Senior Executive Service (e.g., Defense Intelligence Senior Executive Service,
Senior Level employee, and non-appropriated fund senior executive).

   A current or former Presidential appointee.




Change 1, 04/28/2020                             7                        GLOSSARY
