                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 5200.41E
                                                                                June 30, 2016

                                                                                          USD(P)
SUBJECT:     DoD Regional Centers for Security Studies

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5200.41 (Reference (a)) in
accordance with the guidance in section 184 of Title 10, United States Code (Reference (b)) to:

    a. Establish policy and assign responsibilities for oversight, management, function and
operations, and support of the DoD Regional Centers for Security Studies (referred to in this
directive as “Regional Centers”). The Regional Centers include:

       (1) Africa Center for Strategic Studies (ACSS).

       (2) Daniel K. Inouye Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies (APCSS).

       (3) George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies (GCMC).

       (4) Near East South Asia Center for Strategic Studies (NESA).

       (5) William J. Perry Center for Hemispheric Defense Studies (WJPC).

   b. Designate the Director, Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA), as the DoD
Executive Agent for the DoD Regional Centers for Security Studies in accordance with DoDD
5101.1 (Reference (c)).

   c. Incorporate and cancel References (d) through (i).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to
collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).
                                                                 DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The Regional Centers will support defense strategy objectives and policy priorities
through:

       (1) Offering executive-development strategic-security studies, research and outreach in
rigorous outreach programs that foster long-term collaborative relationships.

        (2) Developing and sustaining relationships and communities of interest among security
practitioners and national security establishments, especially in defense, throughout the region.

       (3) Enhancing enduring partnerships among the nations of the region.

    b. The Regional Centers’ activities may cross areas of responsibility (AORs) assigned to
individual geographic Combatant Commanders (GCCs) as established in the Unified Command
Plan (Reference (j)). In such cases, the GCCs will coordinate with one another to identify trans-
regional issues, issues that cut across more than one GCC’s AOR, and interagency challenges, as
well as recommend activities to address them.

    c. There will be one GCC designated as the lead GCC for each Regional Center, and it will
coordinate with other GCCs, as appropriate, on an issue-by-issue basis. The Regional Centers
will coordinate all programs and activities with both the lead GCC and the GCC in whose AOR
the programs and activities will occur.

   d. Regional Center programs and activities will be directly tied to OSD and GCC priorities.

   e. Regional Center programs and activities must be conducted in accordance with the laws
and policies governing U.S. interaction with foreign countries.

    f. GCMC must comply with the German Ministry of Defense DoD Joint Memorandum and
the Memorandum of Agreement between the U.S. Secretary of Defense and the Federal Minister
of Defense of Germany (References (k) and (l)). These documents define the international
partnership between the United States and Germany regarding the GCMC.

   g. The Regional Centers are not an intelligence-collection tool.

    h. All Regional Center programs and activities with foreign participants will be conducted at
the unclassified level unless a waiver is provided by OSD or any GCCs.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.




                                                2
                                                            DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


6. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective June 30, 2016.




                                            Robert O. Work
                                            Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




                                            3
                                                                      DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


                                           ENCLOSURE 1

                                            REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5200.41, “DoD Centers for Regional Security Studies,” July 30, 2004
      (hereby cancelled)
(b)   Title 10, United States Code
(c)   DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(d)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Appointment of Directors of Regional
      Centers,” March 20, 2003 (hereby cancelled)
(e)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegation of Authorities for the Regional
      Centers for Security Studies,” March 2, 2007 (hereby cancelled)
(f)   Directive-type Memorandum 05-002, “Executive Agent for Regional Centers for Security
      Studies,” September 29, 2005 (hereby cancelled)
(g)   DoD Directive 5200.34, “George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies,”
      November 25, 1992 (hereby cancelled)
(h)   DoD Directive 5200.38, “Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies,” January 29, 1996
      (hereby cancelled)
(i)   DoD Directive 3200.13, “Center for Hemispheric Defense Studies,” September 3, 1997
      (hereby cancelled)
(j)   The Unified Command Plan, current edition 1
(k)   German Ministry of Defense DoD Joint Memorandum, “Combined German-American
      Policy Guidance for the George C. Marshall Center for Security Studies,” undated 2
(l)   Memorandum of Agreement between the Secretary of Defense of the United States of
      America and the Federal Minister of Defense of the Federal Republic of Germany
      concerning German participation in the George C. Marshall European Center for Security
      Studies at Garmisch-Partenkirchen, with annexes, December 2, 1994 3
(m)   Section 1065 of Public Law 104-201, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
      1997,” October 1, 1996, as amended
(n)   DoD Directive 5530.3, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987, as amended
(o)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Functional Transfer of Foreign Language
      Training Center Europe,” June 1, 2007
(p)   Section 941 of Public Law 110-417, “Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization Act
      for Fiscal Year 2009,” October 14, 2008, as amended (section 184 of Title 10, United
      States Code note)
(q)   Memorandum of Academic Agreement between the National Defense University and the
      Defense Security Cooperation Agency, March 17, 2008
(r)   Secretary of Defense Guidance, “Implementation of Section 8057, DoD Appropriations
      Act, 2014 (Division C of Public Law 113-76 (‘the DoD Leahy Law’),” August 18, 2014;


1
  This classified document is available to authorized users at
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Unified_Command_Plan.
2
  Available at http://www.marshallcenter.org/mcpublicweb/MCDocs/files/MC/F_Common/mission/us-ge-mc-
guidance-May04-en.pdf.
3
  Copies of this document may be requested by sending an email to lpa-web@dsca.mil.


                                                   4                                   ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                            DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


    section 2249e of Title 10, United States Code, and the DoD Leahy provision included in the
    annual DoD Appropriations Acts (section 8056 of the DoD Appropriations Act, 2015)
(s) Section 1306 of Public Law 103-337, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
    1995,” October 5, 1994, as amended (section113 of Title 10, United States Code note)
(t) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegation of Title 10 U.S.C. § 1050a
    Authority for African Cooperation,” May 3, 2012
(u) Section 8073 of Public Law 107-248, “Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2003,”
    October 23, 2002
(v) Memorandum of Agreement between the Director, Defense Security Cooperation Agency
    and the Director, The George C. Marshall Center and the Commanding General, United
    States Army Europe and Seventh Army, May 8, 2008 4




4
    Copies of this document may be requested by sending an email to lpa-web@dsca.mil.


                                                         5                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P):

   a. Advises the Secretary of Defense on Regional Center policies and activities, and
coordinates with the GCCs on Regional Center policies and activities.

   b. Provides guidance, direction, and oversight for the Regional Centers, including:

        (1) Directly chairing a Regional Centers Oversight and Advocacy Board as necessary
(see paragraph 4.b. of this section).

       (2) Coordinating and approving Regional Center annual program plans through the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans, and Capabilities (ASD(SPC)) and the regional
Assistant Secretaries of Defense (ASDs) within the Office of the USD(P) (OUSD(P)), based
upon input on programmatic needs and priorities from the GCCs.

        (3) Managing personnel, programming, budgeting, and finance through the Director,
DSCA.

       (4) Managing the GCMC, in coordination with the Secretary of the Army, in accordance
with section 7 of this enclosure.

        (5) Overseeing Regional Center activities outlined in the Glossary.

   c. Designates a lead GCC for each Regional Center.

    d. Selects the directors of the Regional Centers from candidates provided through applicable
hiring processes, in consultation with the lead GCC. Issues guidance on the internal hiring
process for Regional Center directors.

    e. Serves as the Regional Center directors’ senior rating official, in consultation with the
lead GCC, and designates an appropriate regional ASD to serve as the first-line rating official for
each Regional Center director.

   f. Consults, as needed, with foreign counterparts in relevant partner ministries of defense
when a Regional Center has an international partner.

    g. Authorizes participation by a European or Eurasian country in GCMC programs, if after
consultation with the appropriate Department of State official, he or she determines that such
participation is in the national interest of the United States in accordance with section 1065 of
Public Law 104-201 (Reference (m)).




                                                 6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


    h. Establishes associated policy and procedures, as necessary, to implement this directive,
including assigning specific areas of focus and country assignments for each Regional Center.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARIES OF DEFENSE (ASDS) IN OUSD(P). Under the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(P), the OUSD(P) ASDs:

   a. With functional responsibilities, provide guidance to the Regional Center directors on
matters within their functional areas through the ASD(SPC).

   b. With regional responsibilities:

     (1) Serve as the rating official of the Regional Center directors as designated by the
USD(P), and ensure that input from the lead GCC is reflected in rating decisions.

        (2) Coordinate and obtain approval of Regional Center annual program plans on behalf
of the USD(P).

        (3) Provide written assessments of the Regional Centers’ annual program plans, in close
coordination with the GCCs, to the Regional Centers Oversight and Advocacy Board for the
specific geographical region they cover, and monitor their execution through relevant regional
Deputy Assistant Secretaries of Defense (DASDs).

       (4) Set indicators of success for each of the Regional Centers, continually monitor their
progress toward achieving those indicators, and annually evaluate the extent to which they have
achieved them, in close coordination with the GCCs.

       (5) Provide regional policy guidance to the Regional Centers operating in his or her
designated AOR in coordination with the GCCs. This responsibility may be delegated to the
relevant regional DASDs.

       (6) Consult regularly with the lead GCCs, functional Combatant Commanders as
required, and Regional Center directors. This responsibility may be delegated to the relevant
regional DASDs.

        (7) Oversee Regional Center interagency relations. This responsibility may be delegated
to the relevant regional DASDs.

   c. Serve as a standing member of the Regional Centers Oversight and Advocacy Board.


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW
INTENSITY CONFLICT (ASD(SO/LIC)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P) and in addition to the responsibilities in section 2 of this enclosure, the ASD(SO/LIC):




                                                7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


    a. Through the DASD for Counternarcotics and Global Threats, provides guidance,
direction, and oversight for the Countering Narcotics and Illicit Trafficking program at the
GCMC. This includes oversight for programming and budgeting in coordination with the
Director, DSCA.

    b. Through the DASD for Special Operations and Counter Terrorism, provides guidance,
direction, and oversight for counter terrorism-related transnational threat programs at the
Regional Centers.


4. ASD(SPC). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), and in addition to the
responsibilities in section 2 of this enclosure, the ASD(SPC):

   a. Coordinates OUSD(P) direction and oversight of the Regional Centers.

    b. In the absence of the USD(P), chairs the Regional Centers Oversight and Advocacy Board
to review Regional Center program and management issues.

       (1) Convenes the Regional Centers Oversight and Advocacy Board which includes
regional ASDs; the ASD(SO/LIC); the Director, DSCA; a representative from the CJCS,
representatives from each of the GCCs, and the directors of the Regional Centers.

      (2) Invites other stakeholders, such as functional ASDs, to provide representatives to
Board meetings.

       (3) Convenes the Board quarterly or as deemed necessary

    c. Coordinates region-specific policy guidance among ASDs and GCCs for all Regional
Centers through the DASD for Security Cooperation, who also serves as the Executive Secretary
of the Regional Centers Oversight and Advocacy Board.


5. DIRECTOR, DSCA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P) and in his or
her capacity as the DoD Executive Agent for the DoD Regional Centers for Security Studies, the
Director, DSCA:

     a. Provides programming, budgeting, and financial management of the resources necessary
to support the operation of the Regional Centers, including all operation and maintenance costs
(i.e., personnel costs and base-operations support costs) in coordination with the GCCs and
others as needed. This includes civilian and military human-resources support and personnel
management and review of significant proposed changes to programs, budgets, and management
practices of the Regional Centers.

   b. Employs and prescribes compensation of civilians as directors, deputy directors, faculty,
and other Regional Center employees in accordance with section 184 of Reference (b). This




                                                8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


authority may be delegated no further than the deputy directors or chief of staff of the Regional
Centers.

   c. Provides guidance to the Regional Center directors on manpower levels in accordance
with resources allocated by the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief
Financial Officer of the Department of Defense.

   d. Develops, negotiates, and concludes memoranda of agreement (MOAs) or similar
documents with DoD Component heads, or their representatives, for the Regional Centers’ base
operations, personnel, or other support, as required.

   e. Develops, negotiates, and concludes international agreements or similar documents, on
behalf of the Regional Centers’ mission objectives, as required, in accordance with applicable
laws and DoDD 5530.3 (Reference (n)).

    f. Approves or provides oversight, as appropriate, based on authorities delegated to the
respective Regional Centers, of contracts for operations or administrative and logistic support
required by the Regional Centers, including oversight for the Government Purchase Card
program.

  g. Maintains visibility of the Partner Language Training Center Europe funding line in the
DSCA budget, as provided in Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (o)).

    h. Reviews Regional Centers’ program management, management practices, administrative
activities, and their performance in achieving DoD resourcing objectives.

    i. Facilitates, enhances, and supports the Regional Centers’ missions and activities through
the coordination of DSCA programs and program management capabilities and delegation of
authorities, as appropriate, within applicable law and DoD policy guidance.

   j. Issues guidance to the Regional Center directors on the acceptance and use of gifts or
donations to defray the costs or to enhance the operation of the Regional Centers, in accordance
with section 2611 of Reference (b).

    k. With the directors of the Regional Centers, ensures that Regional Centers do not hire
foreign individuals to serve in faculty positions who have belonged to a unit of a foreign security
force about which there is credible information that such unit has committed a gross violation of
human rights.

   l. Serves as a standing member of the Regional Centers Oversight and Advocacy Board.

    m. As authorized by section 941 of Public Law 110-417 (Reference (p)) and until the end of
fiscal year 2019, with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, waive reimbursement of
Regional Center activities costs for personnel of nongovernmental and international
organizations who participate in Regional Centers activities that enhance cooperation with U.S.
forces, if attendance of such personnel without reimbursement is in the national security interests



                                                 9                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


of the United States. Costs when reimbursement is waived will be paid from appropriations
available to the Regional Centers.


6. REGIONAL CENTER DIRECTORS. Under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P), the Regional Center directors:

   a. Develop and implement activities in accordance with guidance from the USD(P), in
coordination with the appropriate ASD, lead GCC, and other GCCs as applicable, and within
administrative and resource guidance from the Director, DSCA.

    b. Accept and use gifts or donations to defray the costs or to enhance the operation of the
Regional Centers where authorized by law in sections 184 and 2611 of Reference (b) and, in
accordance with guidance of the Director, DSCA. This authority may be re-delegated no further
than the deputy directors or chief of staff.

   c. Ensure compliance with the terms of the Memorandum of Academic Agreement
(Reference (q)), as applicable to the directors of the ACSS, WJPC, and the NESA.

    d. Hire and establish compensation for deputy directors and faculty. Direct and manage
Regional Center personnel, resources, and programs in accordance with applicable law, this
directive, and other pertinent DoD and DSCA guidance. The authority to hire faculty may be re-
delegated to the deputy directors or chief of staff.

   e. Coordinate with DSCA Office of the General Counsel, prior to hiring any Regional Center
employee who would be concurrently receiving any compensation from a foreign government,
such as a retired military pension, during the term of their DoD employment.

    f. Waive reimbursement of Regional Centers’ activities costs for foreign military officers
and foreign defense and security civilian government officials from a developing country, if
attendance by such personnel without reimbursement is in the national security interest of the
United States pursuant to section 184 of Reference (b).

        (1) Costs for which reimbursement is waived will be paid from appropriations available
to the Regional Centers.

       (2) Potential recipients of such assistance must be vetted for human rights violations, in
accordance with Secretary of Defense Guidance (Reference (r)).

    g. As applicable to the director of the GCMC, implements programs and activities in
accordance with the currently existing international agreements concerning German participation
in the GCMC, and waives reimbursement costs of conferences, seminars, courses of instruction,
or similar GCMC activities for military officers and civilian officials from States located in
Europe or the territory of the former Soviet Union if attendance by such personnel without
reimbursement is in the national security interest of the United States pursuant to section 1306 of




                                                10                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


Public Law 103-337 (Reference (s)). This authority may be re-delegated no further than the
deputy director or chief of staff.

    (1) Costs for reimbursement that are waived will be paid from appropriations available to
GCMC.

       (2) Potential recipients of such funds must be vetted for human rights violations, in
accordance with Reference (r).

   h. As applicable to the director of the WJPC, pay the costs for the travel, subsistence, and
special compensation of officers and students of Latin American countries and other expenses, if
such payments are necessary for Latin American cooperation pursuant to section 1050 of
Reference (b).

        (1) This authority may be re-delegated no further than the deputy director or chief of
staff. Costs will be paid from appropriations available to WJPC.

       (2) Potential recipients of such funds must be vetted for human rights violations, in
accordance with Reference (r).

   i. In addition to the authority delegated to the Commander, U.S. Africa Command in the
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (t)), the authority of the Secretary of
Defense under section 1050a of Reference (b) to pay the costs for the travel, subsistence, and
special compensation of officers and students of African countries and other expenses considered
necessary for African cooperation is also delegated to the directors of the ACSS, GCMC, and
NESA. This authority may be re-delegated no further than the deputy director or chief of staff.

       (1) Costs will be paid from appropriations available to ACSS, GCMC, and NESA.

       (2) Potential recipients of such funds must be vetted for human rights violations, in
accordance with Reference (r).

    j. As applicable to the director of APCSS, waive reimbursement of costs for conferences,
seminars, courses of instruction, or similar activities for foreign nations’ military officers and
civilian officials if attendance of such personnel without reimbursement is in the national
security interests of the United States pursuant to section 8073 of Public Law 107-248
(Reference (u)). This authority may be re-delegated no further than the deputy director or chief
of staff.

       (1) Costs for this reimbursement will be paid from appropriations available to APCSS.

       (2) Potential recipients of such funds must be vetted for human rights violations, in
accordance with Reference (r).

    k. Together with Director, DSCA, ensure that Regional Centers do not hire foreign
individuals to serve in faculty positions who have belonged to a unit of a foreign security force



                                                11                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


about which there is credible information that such unit has committed a gross violation of
human rights.

   l. Serve as a standing member of the Regional Centers Oversight and Advocacy Board.


7. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments nominate personnel for assignment to Regional Center faculty and staffs, and to
attend Regional Center activities and programs as participants.


8. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. In addition to the responsibilities in section 7 of this
enclosure, the Secretary of the Army:

   a. Programs and budgets for administrative, logistic, contracting, information technology,
and finance command support of GCMC in accordance with the MOA between the Director,
DSCA and the Director, GCMC (Reference (v)).

   b. Provides administrative and logistical support to GCMC, including support for the Partner
Language Training Center Europe through arrangements with the Director, GCMC, in
accordance with Reference (v).

  c. Supports base operations and military and civilian human resource services for the
GCMC.


9. CJCS. The CJCS:

   a. Consults and coordinates with the USD(P) and the affected GCCs on matters pertaining to
Regional Center activities and support, as required.

   b. Designates a representative to serve as a permanent representative to the Regional Centers
Oversight and Advocacy Board.

    c. Nominates civilian and military personnel to participate in Regional Center programs and
activities.


10. GCCs. The GCCs:

    a. For the Regional Center whose activities have the greatest impact on the region in which
the GCC has operational command (see Table):




                                               12                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


                        Table. Lead GCC and Associated Regional Center

                               Lead GCC                           Regional Center
             Commander, U.S. European Command                         GCMC
             Commander, U.S. Africa Command                            ACSS
             Commander, U.S. Pacific Command                          APCSS
             Commander, U.S. Southern Command (in                      WJPC
             coordination with Commander, U.S. Northern
             Command)
             Commander, U.S. Central Command                           NESA

        (1) Provide recommendations to the USD(P) on the selection of Regional Center
directors, which the USD(P) will consider when hiring directors.

        (2) Provide written input to rating officials to support the director’s evaluation, which
raters will consider when evaluating the director’s performance.

       (3) Serve as an advocate for the Regional Centers in engagements with military
counterparts and ministries of defense within the GCC’s AOR.

        (4) Provide Regional Center directors, particularly where designated as the GCC lead,
written coordination during the development of their annual program and activity plans prior to
submission to the Regional Centers Oversight and Advocacy Board for approval. Written input
will be to ensure support of and synchronization with theater campaign plans.

       (5) Collaborate with OUSD(P) ASDs to build, review, and provide feedback on Regional
Center annual program plans.

       (6) Collaborate with OUSD(P) ASDs to assess, monitor, and evaluate the Regional
Centers’ effectiveness in achieving OUSD(P) and GCC priorities.

    b. Facilitate Regional Centers’ activities that take place in the GCC AOR and facilitate
interaction with the chief of mission, as necessary.

   c. Participate in oversight and evaluations of Regional Center resource allocation and
management practices.

   d. Nominate and approve foreign participants to attend Regional Center activities and
programs as appropriate.

   e. Designate a representative to serve as a permanent representative to the Regional Centers
Oversight and Advocacy Board.




                                                 13                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


   f. Coordinate and provide input to the Regional Centers’ annual program plans.


11. PRESIDENT, NATIONAL DEFENSE UNIVERSITY. The President, National Defense
University, provides support services and maintains academic relationships with the Regional
Centers, as described in Reference (q) and any implementing arrangements, such as intra-
governmental support agreements.




                                              14                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACSS             Africa Center for Strategic Studies
AOR              area of responsibility
APCSS            Daniel K. Inouye Asia Pacific Center for Security Studies
ASD              Assistant Secretary of Defense
ASD(SO/LIC)      Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity
                 Conflict
ASD(SPC)         Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans, and Capabilities

CJCS             Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DASD             Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
DoDD             DoD Directive
DoDI             DoD Instruction
DSCA             Defense Security Cooperation Agency

GCC              geographic Combatant Commander
GCMC             George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies

MOA              memorandum of agreement

NESA             Near-East South Asia Center for Strategic Studies

OUSD(P)          Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy

USD(P)           Under Secretary of Defense for Policy

WJPC             William J. Perry Center for Hemispheric Defense Studies


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

ACSS. The Regional Center that conducts security cooperation activities with countries in the
Africa region, as defined by the USD(P).

APCSS. The Regional Center that conducts security cooperation activities with countries in the
Asia-Pacific region, as defined by the USD(P).

GCMC. The Regional Center that conducts security cooperation activities with countries in the
Europe, Eurasia, and Central Asia regions, as defined by the USD(P), and focusing on certain
transnational security challenges, as defined by USD(P).



                                                 15                                GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDD 5200.41E, June 30, 2016



NESA. The Regional Center that conducts security cooperation activities with countries in the
Near East, South Asia, and Northern Africa regions, as defined by the USD(P).

Regional Centers for Security Studies. A DoD institution that is operated and designated by the
Secretary of Defense for the study of security issues relating to a specified geographic region of
the world; and serves as a forum for bilateral and multilateral research, communication, and
exchange of ideas involving military and civilian participants.

regional ASDs. ASDs responsible for DoD policy for a specific geographic region of the world.

regional DASDs. DASDs who report to ASDs responsible for a specific geographic region of
the world.

WJPC. The Regional Center that conducts security cooperation activities with countries in the
Western Hemisphere region, as defined by the USD(P).




                                                16                                    GLOSSARY
