                               Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 5515.06
                                                                                 October 25, 2004
                                                         Certified Current as of October 31, 2006

                                                                                         GC, DoD

SUBJECT: Processing Claims Arising out of Operations of Nonappropriated Fund Activities

References: (a) DoD Directive 5515.6, “Processing Tort, Contract and Compensation Claims
                Arising out of Operations of Nonappropriated Fund Activities,” November 3,
                1956 (hereby canceled)
            (b) Sections 1346(b), 2671-2680 of title 28, United States Code
            (c) Chapter 163 of title 10, United States Code
            (d) Sections 3701 and 3721 of title 31, United States Code


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive reissues reference (a) to establish policy governing the administrative processing
of claims arising out of the operation of nonappropriated fund activities.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all
other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as
the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY

    3.1. Current procedures for similar claims against appropriated fund activities should be used
to process tort and personnel claims arising out of the operations of nonappropriated fund
activities, both inside and outside the United States. In cases where established procedures
cannot be applied to such claims, procedures of general similarity shall be used.

    3.2. The payment of tort claims arising from the operations of nonappropriated fund activities
shall be in accordance with the following:
                                                               DoDD 5515.06, October 25, 2004



      3.2.1. A tort liability claim brought under reference (b) or (c) is payable with
nonappropriated funds when the negligent act or omission giving rise to liability was by a
nonappropriated fund employee. Liability arising from acts or omissions of appropriated fund
employees or active duty military members is payable with appropriated funds.

        3.2.2. A personnel claim is payable with nonappropriated funds when the claimant is a
nonappropriated fund employee. Military Personnel and Civilian Employees’ Claims Act claims
of appropriated fund employees and active duty military members brought pursuant to reference
(d), even if working with a nonappropriated fund instrumentality, are compensable with
appropriated funds.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    4.1. The General Counsel of the Department of Defense shall issue DoD Instructions and
other guidance to implement this Directive as appropriate.

    4.2. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall issue regulations to implement the
foregoing policy as appropriate.


5. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




                                           Paul Wolfowitz
                                           Deputy Secretary of Defense
