                             DOD INSTRUCTION 6000.19
     MILITARY MEDICAL TREATMENT FACILITY SUPPORT OF
    MEDICAL READINESS SKILLS OF HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS

Originating Component:        Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness

Effective:                    February 7, 2020

Releasability:                Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division Website
                              at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Approved by:                  Matthew P. Donovan, Performing the Duties of the Under Secretary of
                              Defense for Personnel and Readiness


Purpose: In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02, this issuance establishes
policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures for military medical treatment facility (MTF)
support of the Military Departments in maintaining the:
•   Readiness and core competencies of health care providers within the Military Services.
•   Medical readiness of Service members.
                                                                                               DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Policy. ............................................................................................................................... 3
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES ......................................................................................................... 5
   2.1. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA))........................................ 5
   2.2. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Readiness Policy and Oversight. ...... 5
   2.3. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Services Policy and Oversight. ......... 6
   2.4. Director, DHA................................................................................................................... 6
   2.5. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs. ............................... 7
   2.6. Secretaries of the Military Departments. .......................................................................... 8
   2.7. CJCS. ................................................................................................................................ 8
   2.8. CCDRS. ............................................................................................................................ 9
SECTION 3: PROCEDURES .............................................................................................................. 10
   3.1. Prioritizing Medical Services at MTFS.. ........................................................................ 10
   3.2. Adjusting Authorized Strengths Throughout the MHS. ................................................. 11
   3.3. Aligning and Structuring the MHS and MTFs. .............................................................. 11
   3.4. Reviews, Reports, and Assessments. .............................................................................. 11
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 16
   G.1. Acronyms. ...................................................................................................................... 16
   G.2. Definitions. ..................................................................................................................... 16
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 20




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                                    DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


                SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY.

This issuance applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all
other organizational entities within the DoD.


1.2. POLICY.

It is DoD policy that:

    a. The DoD will support the critical wartime medical readiness skills and core competencies
of health care providers within the Military Services and achieve the highest level of medical
readiness within the Military Services by:

           (1) Prioritizing medical services provided at MTFs.

          (2) Optimizing the authorized strengths for military and civilian medical personnel
throughout the Military Health System (MHS).

           (3) Aligning and structuring the MHS, including the infrastructure of MTFs to
support the readiness needs identified by the Military Departments.

          (4) Recruiting, training, and retaining the appropriate number of medical personnel to
support mission requirements.

          (5) Establishing military-civilian training partnerships when skills cannot be
maintained within MHS facilities.

    b. The scope of authorized medical services, personnel end strengths, and MTF
infrastructure of the direct care system is limited to those clinical and logistical capabilities
which:

       (1) Are needed to maintain the critical wartime medical readiness skills and core
competencies of healthcare providers within the Armed Forces and ensure the medical readiness
of Service members.

       (2) Are vital to the provision of effective and timely health care during contingency
operations.

      (3) Provide services that, if reduced, would not be available through the purchased care
component of the TRICARE program.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                             3
                                                                  DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


        (4) In foreign countries only, provide additional services to the extent necessary to
ensure that covered beneficiaries in that country have access to a similar level of care available to
covered beneficiaries in the United States.

   c. Critical wartime medical readiness skills and core competencies are tied directly to
medical functions of the deployed military medical force.

    d. Civilian and contractor personnel providing primary care services in MTFs are used only
to the extent that they are needed to:

       (1) Maintain the critical wartime medical readiness skills of health care providers within
the Military Services.

       (2) Ensure the medical readiness of the Military Services.

      (3) Provide services that, if reduced, will not be available through the purchased care
component of the TRICARE program.

   e. In managing direct care system civilian personnel authorization levels, compliance with
Section 129c of Title 10, United States Code will be maintained.

   f. Safety and Occupational Health services provided by MTFs pursuant to DoD Instruction
6055.01 are exempt from the provisions of this issuance.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                            4
                                                               DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


                           SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)).

Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness (USD(P&R)), the ASD(HA):

   a. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, develops policy for MTF
support of the Military Departments in the maintenance of critical wartime medical skills.

    b. In conjunction with the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Director, Defense
Health Agency (DHA), reviews at least every 2 years the MHS infrastructure, military and
civilian authorized and actual personnel strength, and services delivered at military MTFs with
respect to the MHS’s ability to maintain wartime medical skills and medically ready Military
Services.

   c. Recommends to the USD(P&R) the following to maintain wartime medical skills and
maximize the medical readiness of the Military Services:

       (1) Changes in MHS infrastructure.

       (2) In conjunction with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, adjustments in
authorized strengths of military and civilian health care providers within MTFs.

       (3) In conjunction with the CJCS and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower
and Reserve Affairs (ASD(M&RA)), changes in the Active and Reserve Component distribution
of medical authorizations.

    d. Reviews requests by the Secretaries of the Military Departments to convert military
medical positions to civilian medical positions consistent with applicable law and recommends
for such conversions to the USD(P&R).


2.2. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH READINESS
POLICY AND OVERSIGHT.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), through the ASD(HA), the Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Readiness Policy and Oversight:

    a. Analyzes recommendations from the Director, DHA, regarding changes in direct care
system capacity and infrastructure within the MHS and sends proposed policy changes to the
ASD(HA).

   b. In conjunction with the CJCS, annually reviews military manpower data provided by the
Secretaries of the Military Departments, and sends the ASD(HA) recommendations in
accordance with Paragraphs 3.4.a.(1) through (4).



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       5
                                                                 DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


   c. Evaluates the effectiveness of the clinical readiness assessment processes of the Military
Departments and DHA to maintain critical wartime medical skills.

    d. Develops metrics to assess the effectiveness of this issuance within 1 year of the effective
date of this issuance.

   e. Provides the ASD(HA) with recommendations to improve this issuance at least annually.


2.3. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH SERVICES
POLICY AND OVERSIGHT.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), through the ASD(HA), the Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Services Policy and Oversight:

    a. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, assesses the
effectiveness of the Health Professions Officer Special and Incentive Pay Program on accession
and retention of wartime medical specialties identified in Section 708(d) of Public Law 114-328.
Sends change recommendations to the ASD(HA) based on these assessments.

    b. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Director, DHA,
assesses the effectiveness of the graduate medical education and other DoD medical education
and training programs in producing the appropriate mix of physicians and medical specialists
needed for operational medical force readiness requirements.


2.4. DIRECTOR, DHA.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), through the ASD(HA), the
Director, DHA:

   a. Publishes procedural guidance necessary to implement this issuance.

    b. Coordinates with the Secretaries of the Military Departments to place medical personnel
in DHA-administered MTFs to meet medical force readiness requirements.

    c. In conjunction with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, establishes military-
civilian partnerships, DoD and Department of Veterans Affairs collaborations, and other like
undertakings as necessary and appropriate. These partnerships provide venues and opportunities
for military medical personnel to obtain and maintain currency in clinical knowledge, skills, and
abilities (KSAs) associated with their medical specialty or community, at or above minimum
established thresholds.

   d. Maintains a registry of partnerships established in Paragraph 2.4.c.

       (1) Identifies to the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the ASD(HA)
opportunities for streamlining and adding partnerships as needed.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        6
                                                                   DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


       (2) In conjunction with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, establishes
performance metrics to assess partnerships.

    e. As the integrator of the direct and purchased care components of the MHS, ensures health
care services displaced from the direct care system are available in the TRICARE provider
network.

    f. In conjunction with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, provides annual
recommendations to the ASD(HA) for optimizing the military MTF’s contributions to health
care provider’s or Service member’s readiness in accordance with Paragraph 3.4.b.(1). The
Director, DHA will support and assist the Secretaries of the Military Departments for decisions
under Military Department authority with respect to this paragraph.

    g. Establishes system-wide standards and procedures for assigning primary care managers in
the direct and purchased care components for non-active duty TRICARE Prime enrollees to
achieve the end state directed by Section 725 of Public Law 114-328.

   h. Validates processes for patient referrals to MTFs for specialty care associated with
wartime medical skills readiness and core competencies of military health care providers.

    i. Serves as the approval authority for initiation, renewal, or continuation of all contract
clinics.

    j. Approves exceptions for the use of contract health care providers who provide primary
care services primarily to non-military patients in MTFs and associated sites in accordance with
Paragraph 3.4.b.(3).

    k. For direct care system civilian employees providing primary care services to non-military
patients, develops and implements:

        (1) A transition plan to review civilian employee vacancies that occur against the end-
state required by Section 725 of Public Law 114-328.

       (2) Standards and procedures to control approval to fill such vacant positions, including
procedures to allow, subject to any applicable labor relations obligations, qualified employees
not working in positions that remain authorized in accordance with Section 725 of Public Law
114-328 to fill vacancies that remain authorized before proceeding with a new hire.


2.5. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE
AFFAIRS.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Manpower and Reserve Affairs approves procedures for:

   a. Monitoring compliance with wartime medical readiness skills maintenance among
Reserve Component medical personnel.



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        7
                                                                 DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


    b. Requiring Reserve Component medical personnel to meet the same clinical readiness
standards as Active Component medical personnel prior to deployment.


2.6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS.

The Secretaries of the Military Departments:

   a. Build medical forces to meet CJCS-validated requirements.

   b. Approve Military Department-specific expeditionary KSAs established for each clinical
specialty in accordance with Paragraph 3.4.c.(1).

   c. Develop and maintain readiness for medical personnel through:

        (1) Placement, primarily by assignment, of medical personnel at military MTFs in
accordance with Military Department-determined clinical readiness requirements and the
capabilities of the MTF to generate operational medical readiness established by the Director,
DHA. If workload is insufficient to meet requirements, the Secretary of the Military Department
concerned, will identify alternative training and clinical practice sites for uniformed medical and
dental personnel, and may establish military-civilian training partnerships to provide such
workload. The Secretary concerned will inform the Director, DHA of any such agreements.
Direct care MTFs are the default choice for assignment, allocation, detail, or other utilization of
military medical personnel for the purposes of generating operational medical readiness.

      (2) Provision of venues and opportunities for military personnel to meet Military
Department defined non-clinical readiness standards.

    d. Implement a clinical readiness assessment process for wartime medical skills maintenance
and provide an annual evaluation to the ASD(HA) in accordance with Paragraphs 3.4.c.(2) and
3.4.c.(3).

   e. Approve additional medical, clinical, or logistical capabilities required at MTFs,
developed in accordance with Paragraph 3.1.a.(5)(b), and submit these requirements to the
ASD(HA).


2.7. CJCS.

The CJCS:

   a. Validates medical requirements submitted by Combatant Commanders (CCDRs).

    b. Provides joint medical force requirements to the Secretaries of the Military Departments,
the ASD(HA), and the Director, DHA.

   c. Assesses medical force structure ability to meet joint force requirements.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        8
                                                               DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


  d. Collects and shares lessons learned with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the
ASD(HA), the Director, DHA, and the Director of the Joint Staff.


2.8. CCDRS.

The CCDRs:

    a. Review operational plans annually to identify changes in requirements that would require
revised joint medical capability support.

   b. Validate and submit joint medical requirements annually to the CJCS.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       9
                                                                    DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


                                 SECTION 3: PROCEDURES

3.1. PRIORITIZING MEDICAL SERVICES AT MTFS.

    a. The direct care system will provide the medical services listed in Paragraphs 3.1.a (1)-
3.1.a (5). Services not in one of these categories may be provided only when additional capacity
exists, and when provision of such services will not interfere with delivery of prioritized
services. Prioritized services are:

        (1) Evaluation and treatment of active component service members to maintain and
restore readiness.

        (2) Health readiness assessment and authorized medical readiness services for members
of the Reserve Components.

        (3) Evaluation and treatment of eligible beneficiaries, including family members and
retirees, by military health care providers to maintain the operational medical skills of those
providers.

       (4) Primary care services to non-military patients by civilian or contractor personnel if:

           (a) The primary care services support is necessary to maintain DoD graduate medical
education or other DoD medical education and training programs; or

              (b) The purchased care component of TRICARE is unable to meet patient primary
care needs.

       (5) Capabilities relating to the provision of health care that are necessary to accomplish
operational requirements.

              (a) These capabilities include:

                 1. Combat casualty care.

                2. Medical response to and treatment of injuries sustained from chemical,
biological, radiological, nuclear, or explosive incidents.

                 3. Diagnosis and treatment of infectious diseases.

                 4. Aerospace medicine.

                 5. Undersea medicine.

                 6. Diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation of specialized medical conditions.

                 7. Diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries that are not related to battle.

                 8. Humanitarian assistance.


SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                                  10
                                                                  DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


            (b) The Military Departments may define additional essential medical, clinical, and
logistical capabilities vital to the provision of effective and timely health care during contingency
operations. These capabilities may be at the unit or individual level.

    b. The purchased care system, rather than the direct care system, will provide services that
do not directly contribute to Military Department-defined military health care provider wartime
skills maintenance or the medical readiness of Service members to the greatest extent feasible.


3.2. ADJUSTING AUTHORIZED STRENGTHS THROUGHOUT THE MHS.

    a. Personnel working within the direct care component of the MHS must spend most of their
effort on activities that contribute, directly or indirectly, to their own or another health care
provider’s wartime medical skills maintenance, or to the medical readiness of Active or Reserve
Component Service members.

    b. Civilian employees and contractor personnel will discontinue primary care for non-
military patients subject to the ability of the purchased care component of TRICARE to meet the
patient care needs. Personnel reductions are also subject to the requirements of Section 129c of
Title 10, United States Code. This discontinuation will be on a rolling basis as provider
vacancies occur or contract periods expire. Civilian employees and contractor personnel may
continue to provide primary care to non-military patients if care of these patients is necessary to
support DoD graduate medical education or other DoD medical education and training programs.

    c. Authorizations for military personnel in the direct care component of the MHS should be
associated with a wartime requirement, as verified by the Secretary of the Military Department
concerned.


3.3. ALIGNING AND STRUCTURING THE MHS AND MTFS.

    a. The primary purpose of military MTFs is to support the readiness of the Military Services.
The infrastructure of MTFs (size, type and location of each MTF) must further this readiness
objective. Each MTF must spend most of its resources supporting wartime skills, development
and maintenance for military medical personnel, or the medical evaluation and treatment of
Service members.

    b. Consistent with the end state required by Section 725 of Public Law 114-328, exceptions
are permitted only when there is inadequate health care capability or capacity in the purchased
care components of TRICARE, or in a foreign country where there is inadequate access to a
similar level of care as is available in the United States.


3.4. REVIEWS, REPORTS, AND ASSESSMENTS.

   a. The Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Readiness, Policy, and
Oversight, in coordination with the Joint Staff, provides the ASD(HA) recommendations on:



SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                             11
                                                                 DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


      (1) Staffing levels for trauma-related and other wartime medical specialties, as defined in
the DoD Personnel Management Plan developed in response to Section 708(d) of Public Law
114-328.

        (2) Health care provider readiness by specialty. This includes the total number of fully
trained providers, those who have current privileges in their specialty (where applicable), have
accomplished relevant workload for their expeditionary role, and those medically and
administratively available for utilization in deployed or operational assignments.

       (3) Individual expeditionary readiness for all medical personnel.

       (4) Minimum joint medical staffing levels to meet DoD mission requirements.

   b. DHA:

       (1) Develops recommendations for:

            (a) Adjustments in the authorized capacity to host MHS military and expeditionary
civilian personnel to maintain wartime medical readiness skills. DHA will not direct a change in
the structure of the chain of command within a Military Department or with respect to military
medical personnel assigned to that command.

            (b) In conjunction with the Military Departments, realignments and restructuring of
infrastructure within the MHS to include deployable infrastructure within the MHS. If a
recommendation to close or downsize a MTF is made, it will include the methodology and
criteria used in accordance with Section 711 of Public Law 115-232.

           (c) Changes in the type and scope of medical services provided at military MTFs in
order to maintain wartime medical readiness skills and support the medical needs of the Military
Services.

       (2) In conjunction with the Military Departments, develops:

           (a) Military health care provider FTE decrements for fitness, deployment, and
readiness-related training requirements.

            (b) Opportunities that support individual and collective clinical or medical leadership
skills sustainment for military medical personnel.

       (3) Establishes standards and procedures governing the use of contract health care
providers.

            (a) No new contracts for health care providers who provide primary care services
primarily to non-military patients in MTFs and associated sites will be awarded or renewed, and
no contract options will be exercised, unless an exception is approved by the Director, DHA.




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                           12
                                                                   DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


            (b) Exceptions will not be approved unless the health care provider positions in the
contract are part of an approved transition plan to reach the end state required by Section 725 of
Public Law 114-328 without unnecessary delay.

           (c) The approval authority for exceptions may be delegated to the DHA Component
Acquisition Executive.

            (d) Contract health care providers may be used if necessary to maintain graduate
medical education programs or other DoD medical education and training programs or to provide
a referral base for specialty care services that cannot feasibly be referred from the purchased care
component of the TRICARE program. However, the specialty care services must be required to
maintain the wartime medical readiness skills of military health care providers.

        (4) Establishes procedures at all military MTFs for members of the Reserve Components
to receive all health readiness assessments and services.

        (5) Develops metrics to assess the contributions to readiness provided by military MTFs
with respect to maintaining, including:

             (a) Critical wartime medical readiness skills and core competencies of health care
providers.

             (b) The medical readiness of the Military Services.

        (6) Analyzes care provided by military MTFs and DHA-established partnerships with
respect to clinical readiness support and sends change recommendations and opportunities to
consolidate partnerships to the ASD(HA).

       (7) In conjunction with the Military Departments:

          (a) Develops clinical skills assessments for medical personnel assigned to military
MTFs and partnership programs, and provides training and retraining opportunities as needed for
each wartime medical specialty.

             (b) Assesses the wartime medical readiness skills and core competencies of military
health care providers assigned to military MTFs and DHA-established partnership programs in
accordance with Military Department-defined requirements at least annually. Provides the
results to the ASD(HA) and the Secretary of the appropriate Military Department.

        (8) Maintains a registry of all military-civilian partnerships, DoD and Department of
Veterans Affairs collaborations, and other like undertakings established by the Director, DHA or
the Secretaries of the Military Departments that are intended to provide venues and opportunities
for military medical personnel to obtain and maintain currency in clinical skills. All partnerships
will include a provision for capturing and reporting workload. Workload capture and reporting
will be automated whenever possible.




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                             13
                                                                  DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


         (9) Assesses the effectiveness of processes for referral of specialty care associated with
critical wartime medical readiness skills and core competencies of military health care providers
to the military MTFs from the TRICARE provider network.

       (10) Uses the planning, programming and budgeting process to provide accurate
requirements for health readiness services for military members of the Active and Reserve
Components.

   c. The Military Departments:

       (1) Establish expeditionary KSAs for health care providers, which must be:

            (a) Distinct from the minimum requirements for an individual to be designated as
fully qualified to hold a particular medical specialty by the Secretary of the Military Department
concerned.

           (b) Unable to be met in a just-in-time manner immediately before assignment to the
operational force.

           (c) Reviewed in accordance with Military Department procedures.

           (d) Incorporated into any established joint clinical readiness metrics.

           (e) Provided to the ASD(HA) annually or when revised.

      (2) Implement a clinical readiness assessment process for each of their respective
Departments.

           (a) For privileged health care providers, the assessment must include the provider
having privileges appropriate for the Military Department-defined requirements of that specialty.
Additional assessments must be evidence-based.

             (b) For all medical personnel, the assessment must identify those medical readiness
skills that will be acquired in a just-in-time manner immediately before assignment to the
operational force.

       (3) Report the following to the ASD(HA) and ASD(M&RA) on an annual basis:

           (a) Wartime medical personnel shortages, by specialty and component, that cannot be
resolved through accession and personnel management processes.

           (b) Military medical positions recommended for conversion to civilian medical
positions or elimination.

       (4) Report through the Defense Readiness Reporting System to the Assistant Secretary
of Defense for Readiness, the medical personnel available for deployment, by specialty and
component.




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                            14
                                                               DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


        (5) Report to the ASD(HA) and Director, DHA any military-civilian partnerships
established in accordance with Paragraph 2.6.c.(1).

        (6) Analyzes care provided by Military Department-established partnerships with respect
to clinical readiness support, and sends change recommendations to the ASD(HA) at least
annually.

        (7) Develops KSA assessments for medical personnel assigned to Military Department-
established partnerships, and provides training and retraining opportunities as needed for each
wartime medical special




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                         15
                                                                   DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


                                          GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

 ACRONYM                   MEANING

 ASD(HA)                   Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs

 CCDR                      Combatant Commander
 CJCS                      Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

 DHA                       Defense Health Agency
 DoDD                      DoD directive

 KSA                       knowledge, skills, and abilities

 MHS                       Military Health System
 MTF                       medical treatment facility

 USD(P&R)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


G.2. DEFINITIONS.

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

 TERM                      DEFINITION

 authorized strength       The total number of authorized military and civilian personnel
                           positions identified on the manning document for an MTF. For
                           military positions, authorized means the Secretary of the appropriate
                           Military Department has agreed to commit an authorized position, as
                           defined by subtitle A of Part 1 of Chapter 1 of Section 101 of Title
                           10, United States Code against the manning document. For civilian
                           positions, authorized means the Secretary of the appropriate Military
                           Department or the Director, DHA, has determined a required position
                           on the manning document must be funded for effective operation of
                           the MTF.

 beneficiaries             Individuals eligible for health care services in accordance with
                           Chapter 55 of Title 10, United States Code.

 civilian employees        Any non-military health care provider who has patients empaneled to
 providing primary         himself or herself and serves as the manager for clinical care of those
 care services             patients. This includes physicians, nurse practitioners, and physician
                           assistants practicing in the fields of


GLOSSARY                                                                                          16
                                                               DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


TERM                    DEFINITION

                        family medicine, general medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics, and,
                        in certain cases, gynecology.

contract clinics        Treatment facilities that are physically separate from an inpatient
                        military MTF; staffed exclusively or primarily by contractor
                        personnel; dedicated to treating DoD beneficiaries unless primarily
                        serving Service members; and operated in effect as an extension of an
                        MTF.

contract health         Medical and dental personnel who are authorized to provide health
providers               care services in military MTFs or contract clinics by way of a
                        personal services contract pursuant to Section 1091 of Title 10,
                        United States Code or a non-personal services contract.

clinical readiness      Clinical practice that is relevant to a provider or provider team’s
                        ability to perform their assigned deployed role. This would include
                        MTF-based practice as well as clinical experience gained through
                        partnerships. Also included are relevant medical education,
                        licensure, and privileging for providers and team members.

deployed                Relocated from a person’s regular, fixed duty location to a temporary
                        duty location that is in support of a DoD-supported operation.

direct care             Medical care provided to Service members and beneficiaries from
                        healthcare facilities and medical support organizations owned by the
                        DoD.

end state required by   Authorized medical services, personnel strengths, and MTF
Section 725 of Public   infrastructure of the direct care system are limited to those needed to
Law 114-328             maintain the critical wartime medical readiness skills and core
                        competencies of healthcare providers within the DoD and ensure the
                        medical readiness of Service members.

expeditionary           Possession of the appropriate KSAs required to perform duties of a
readiness               Service member’s assigned specialty in a deployed or operational
                        setting.

health care provider    Defined in Joint Publication 4-02.

just-in-time manner     Six weeks or fewer.

MHS                     All DoD medical and dental programs, personnel, facilities, and other
                        assets operating pursuant to Chapter 55 of Title 10,




GLOSSARY                                                                                      17
                                                               DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


TERM                    DEFINITION

                        United States Code, by which the DoD provides: Health care
                        services and support to the Military Services during the range of
                        military operations; and health care services and support to Service
                        members, their family members, and others entitled to DoD medical
                        care, in accordance with DoDD 5136.01.

medical readiness       Applied to medical personnel this includes all of the clinical and non-
                        clinical individual and team requirements necessary to accomplish
                        the deployed mission.

medical personnel       A Service member, civilian employee, or contracted individual,
                        whose primary duty involves the delivery or direct support of the
                        delivery of medical or dental care.

military health care    Service personnel who are authorized to perform health care
provider                functions. This includes members of the Active and Reserve
                        Components.

non-military patients   Persons authorized to receive care in accordance with Chapter 55 of
                        Title 10, United States Code, who are not currently a member of the
                        Military Services (any component). This includes family members of
                        active duty military personnel, persons who have retired from the
                        Military Services, and family members of persons who have retired
                        from the Military Services.

primary care            The provision of integrated, accessible health care services by
                        clinicians who are accountable for addressing a large majority of
                        personal health care needs, developing a sustained partnership with
                        patients, and practicing in the context of family and community.
                        Within the direct care system, all patients are empaneled to a specific
                        provider responsible for the overall management of his or her health
                        care.

privileged health       A health care professional who, in accordance with the regulations of
care provider           a Military Department or the DHA, is granted clinical practice
                        privileges to provide health care services in a MTF, in accordance
                        with DHA Procedures Manual 6025.13. Privileged providers include
                        physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, and certain other
                        medical professionals with credentials that allow independent
                        diagnosis or treatment of specific medical conditions.

purchased care          Medical care provided by civilian providers, including individuals,
                        groups, hospitals, and clinics, who have agreed to accept TRICARE
                        beneficiaries. Providers in the purchased care system generally



GLOSSARY                                                                                       18
                                                         DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


TERM              DEFINITION

                  deliver healthcare at negotiated rates, adhere to provider agreements,
                  and follow other requirements of the managed care program.

wartime medical   Specific abilities required by medical personnel that are essential to
skills            the success of the medical mission during deployed operations.

wartime medical   Medical specialties identified in the DoD Personnel Management
specialties       Plan for Trauma-Related and Other Wartime Medical Specialties,
                  developed in response to Section 708(d) of Public Law 114-328.
                  These include emergency medical services and pre-hospital care;
                  trauma surgery; critical care medicine; anesthesiology; emergency
                  medicine; and other wartime specialties as determined by the
                  Secretary of Defense.




GLOSSARY                                                                                   19
                                                            DoDI 6000.19, February 7. 2020


                                     REFERENCES
Defense Health Agency Procedures Manual 6025.13, “Clinical Quality Management in the
    Military Health System,” August 29, 2019.
DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
DoD Directive 5136.01, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA)),”
    September 30, 2013, as amended
DoD Instruction 6055.01, “DoD Safety and Occupational Health (SOH) Program,” October 14,
    2014, as amended.
Joint Publication 4-02, “Joint Health Services,” December 11, 2017, as amended
Public Law 114-328, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017,” December 23,
    2016
Public Law 115-232, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019,” August 13,
    2018
United States Code, Title 10




REFERENCES                                                                               20
