                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 6130.05
                                                                              February 18, 2011
                                                  Incorporating Change 2, Effective April 1, 2020

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      DoD Nutrition Committee

References: (a) DoD Directive 3235.02E, “DoD Combat Feeding Research and Engineering
                Program, DoD Combat Feeding Research and Engineering Board, and DoD
                Nutrition Committee,” May 21, 2004, as amended
            (b) DoD Instruction 1010.10, “Health Promotion and Disease Prevention,”
                April 28, 2014, as amended
            (c) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
            (d) DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental
                Committee Management Program,” July 10, 2009, as amended


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides
procedures for the DoD Nutrition Committee in accordance with the authority in References (a)
through (d).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy:

   a. To provide appropriate nutrition for the Military Services.

   b. To provide appropriate dietary supplements to Service members where indicated.
                                                              DoDI 6130.05, February 18, 2011


    c. To provide education and training to Service members in order to ensure that they are able
to make healthy lifestyle choices regarding nutrition and dietary supplements and so achieve and
maintain performance and health.

    d. That committee and subcommittee members appointed to the DoD Nutrition Committee,
pursuant to Reference (d), shall be full-time or permanent part-time employees of the Federal
Government. Members of the Reserve Components appointed to the Committee shall be
individuals assigned to title 10, United States Code, billets.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 1.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 2.


7. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. The change to this issuance updates references and removes
expiration language in accordance with current Chief Management Officer of the Department of
Defense direction.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective February 18, 2011.




                                                Clifford L. Stanley
                                                Under Secretary of Defense for
                                                Personnel and Readiness
Enclosures
   1. Responsibilities
   2. Procedures




Change 2, 04/01/2020                            2
                                                                DoDI 6130.05, February 18, 2011


                                         ENCLOSURE 1

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)). The
ASD(HA), under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), shall:

   a. Chair the DoD Nutrition Committee pursuant to Reference (a).

   b. Establish the structure of the DoD Nutrition Committee and its operating procedures in
accordance with this Instruction and Reference (a).

   c. Approve the appointment of the chairs of subcommittees, working groups, integrated
product teams, and any other such subordinate organizations of the DoD Nutrition Committee.

   d. Monitor the implementation of approved DoD Nutrition Committee recommendations.

   e. Obtain USD(P&R) approval for overall clinical policy development and policy
implementation guidance for:

       (1) The provision of appropriate nutrition information, education recommendations, and
suggested actions for the Military Services.

       (2) The provision of appropriate dietary supplements and other self-care products to
Service members.


2. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARIES OF DEFENSE (DASDs) FOR HEALTH
SERVICES POLICY AND OVERSIGHT (HSP&O) AND HEALTH READINESS POLICY
AND OVERSIGHT (HRP&O). The DASDHSP&O) and DASDHRP&O), under the authority,
direction, and control of the ASD(HA), shall, when the ASD(HA) is unavailable to perform the
duties of the Chair, serve as co-chairs of the DoD Nutrition Committee to oversee routine
Committee business.


3. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall provide
appropriate representation to the DoD Nutrition Committee, its subcommittees, and any other
subordinate organizations in accordance with the guidance in this Instruction and Reference (a).


4. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities in section 3 of this enclosure and in accordance
with Reference (a), shall:




Change 2, 04/01/2020                             3                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 6130.05, February 18, 2011


    a. Implement policies, processes, and programs to provide adequate and appropriate
nutrition to Service members in a cost-effective manner, taking into consideration relevant
recommendations of the DoD Nutrition Committee.

    b. Provide military-specific education and training to Service members on the benefits of
adequate and appropriate nutrition and the use of and potential harm from dietary supplements,
taking into consideration relevant recommendations of the DoD Nutrition Committee.


5. PRESIDENT OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES UNIVERSITY OF THE HEALTH
SCIENCES (USUHS). The President of USUHS, under the authority, direction, and control of
the ASD(HA), shall provide appropriate representation to the DoD Nutrition Committee
(pursuant to Reference (a)), and to its subcommittees and any other subordinate organizations in
accordance with this Instruction.




Change 2, 04/01/2020                             4                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 6130.05, February 18, 2011


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                        PROCEDURES


1. COMMITTEE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS. The DoD Nutrition Committee shall:

   a. Be chaired by the ASD(HA) pursuant to Reference (a).

  b. Be co-chaired by the DASD(HSP&O) and the DASD(HRP&O) as substitutes when the
ASD(HA) is unavailable to serve as Chair for the routine conduct of Committee business.

    c. Consist of representatives of the Military Department Surgeons General; the President of
USUHS; and others from within the Department of Defense who have a professional interest and
expertise in nutrition, health promotion, combat feeding, and military food service in accordance
with Reference (a), as well as in dietary supplements and other self-care products. The
representatives must be full time or permanent part time Federal Government employees.

   d. Provide advice to the Combat Feeding Research and Engineering Board and the Combat
Feeding Program in accordance with Reference (a).

   e. Have two standing subcommittees: the Food and Nutrition Subcommittee and a Dietary
Supplements and Other Self-Care Products Subcommittee.


2. SUBCOMMITTEE FUNCTIONS. The standing subcommittees shall support the DoD
Nutrition Committee in performing the functions specified in Reference (a).

    a. The Food and Nutrition Subcommittee shall make recommendations on policy and the
nutrition requirements of the Military Services and other DoD beneficiary groups in areas
including, but not limited to:

       (1) Combat feeding for the Military Services.

       (2) Menu design for the Military Services.

       (3) Nutrition research:

           (a) Designed for the Military Services.

           (b) Designed for other DoD beneficiary populations.

       (4) Weight management and fitness programs for the Military Services.

       (5) Human performance optimization in the Military Services.




Change 2, 04/01/2020                            5                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 6130.05, February 18, 2011


       (6) Nutrition education:

           (a) Designed for the Military Services.

           (b) Designed for other DoD beneficiary groups.

    b. The Dietary Supplements and Other Self-Care Products Subcommittee shall make policy
recommendations to the Military Services and other DoD beneficiary groups regarding the use of
dietary supplements, where indicated, in areas including, but not limited to:

       (1) Dietary supplement education.

       (2) Military-specific research.

       (3) Adverse event reporting and monitoring.

       (4) Human performance optimization.

       (5) Military Service special operations.

       (6) Identification of research gaps and requirements.

       (7) Identification of opportunities for resource sharing and cost containment among the
Military Services.

   c. Each subcommittee shall:

       (1) Propose a chair for approval by the Chair of the DoD Nutrition Committee.

       (2) Complete an annual plan with stated goals and objectives and submit it for approval
by the DoD Nutrition Committee.

   d. The subcommittee chairs may invite non-voting participation of representatives of other
appropriate organizations within and outside the Department of Defense as long as they are full-
time or permanent part-time Federal Government employees acting in their official capacities.
Where appropriate, the subcommittee chairs should invite the participation of representatives
from DoD organizations concerned with nutritional logistics.


3. SUBCOMMITTEE OPERATIONS

   a. The subcommittees shall meet at least three times a year or when a specific need arises.
The meetings may include representative participation by remote video or telephone
conferencing.




Change 2, 04/01/2020                              6                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 6130.05, February 18, 2011


   b. Chairs shall designate a member or support staff to keep minutes, and the chairs shall
forward the minutes to the DoD Nutrition Committee within 30 days of meeting adjournment.

    c. The subcommittees shall coordinate with each other prior to submitting recommendations
for consideration by the DoD Nutrition Committee.

   d. The subcommittees shall provide expert advice to the Combat Feeding and Research
Engineering Board through the DoD Nutrition Committee as required.




Change 2, 04/01/2020                           7                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 6130.05, February 18, 2011


                                            GLOSSARY

                                           DEFINITIONS


The following terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this Instruction.

dietary supplement

    A product (other than tobacco) that is intended to supplement a diet that bears or contains one
or more of these dietary ingredients: a vitamin; a mineral; an herb or other botanical; an amino
acid; a dietary substance for use by humans to supplement the diet by increasing the total daily
intake of that substance; or a concentrate, metabolite, constituent, or extract, or combinations of
these ingredients.

   Is intended for ingestion in pill, capsule, tablet, or liquid form.

   Is not represented for use as a conventional food or as the sole item of a meal or diet.

   Is labeled as a “dietary supplement.”

    Includes products such as an approved, new drug-certified antibiotic or licensed biologic that
was marketed as a dietary supplement or food before approval, certification, or license (unless
the Secretary of Health and Human Services waives this provision).

nutrition

    The processes by which living organisms obtain food and use it for growth, metabolism, and
repair. Its stages include ingestion, digestion, absorption, transport, assimilation, and excretion.

   The science that deals with food and nourishment, including dietary guidelines, food
composition, and the roles that various nutrients have in maintaining health.

other self-care products. Products voluntarily introduced into the body that are not defined
strictly as food or dietary supplements. Examples include functional foods (any healthy food
claimed to have a health-promoting or disease-preventing property beyond the basic function of
supplying nutrients) and transdermal air- and sea-sickness and testosterone patches.




Change 2, 04/01/2020                               8                                   GLOSSARY
