                             Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 6490.06
                                                                                  April 21, 2009
                                                         Incorporating Change 2, March 31, 2017

                                                                                      USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Counseling Services for DoD Military, Guard and Reserve, Certain Affiliated
             Personnel, and Their Family Members

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction establishes and implements counseling policies and identifies
and assigns responsibilities for providing counseling support in accordance with the authority in
DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02 (Reference (a)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

    a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to as the “DoD
Components”). The term “Military Services” as used herein refers to the Army, the Navy, the
Air Force, and the Marine Corps.

    b. Members of the Active Component and of the Army National Guard, Army Reserve, Air
National Guard, Air Force Reserve, Marine Corp Reserve, and Naval Reserve (hereafter referred
to as the “Active and Reserve Components”) and their family members.

   c. DoD civilian personnel designated as Civilian Expeditionary Workforce members
pursuant to DoDD 1404.10 (Reference (b)) and their family members.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

   a. Promote a culture that encourages delivery and receipt of counseling.
                                                                  DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009



   b. Eliminate barriers to and the negative stigma associated with seeking counseling support.

   c. Empower leaders to advocate for those in their charge to receive counseling.

    d. Provide easy access to a continuum of counseling support to include prevention, early
intervention, and treatment to enhance coping and build resilience.

   e. View counseling support as a force multiplier enhancing military and family readiness.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
references, effective date, and releasability for accuracy.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective April 21, 2009.




                                                    T. F. Hall
                                                    Performing the Duties of the
                                                    Under Secretary of Defense
                                                    for Personnel and Readiness

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 2, 03/31/2017                           2
                                                                  DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

                                        ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b)   DoD Directive 1404.10, “DoD Civilian Expeditionary Workforce,” January 23, 2009
(c)   DoD Instruction 6400.06, “Domestic Abuse Involving DoD Military and Certain Affiliated
      Personnel,” August 21, 2007, as amended
(d)   DoD Directive 6495.01, “Sexual Assault Prevention and Response (SAPR) Program,”
      January 23, 2012, as amended
(e)   Section 552a of title 5, United States Code
(f)   DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(g)   DoD Instruction 6025.18, “Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information in DoD
      Health Care Programs,” December 2, 2009
(h)   American Psychiatric Association, “Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
      Fourth Edition (DSM-IV),” 1994
(i)   DoD Instruction 1342.22, “Military Family Readiness,” July 3, 2012, as amended
(j)   Public Law 110-289, “Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008,” July 30, 2008
(k)   Sections 501-596 of title 50, United States Code
(l)   Chapter 55 and sections 836 and 1145 of title 10, United States Code
(m)   DoD Instruction 6400.01, “Family Advocacy Program (FAP),” February 13, 2015
(n)   DoD Instruction 6495.02, “Sexual Assault Prevention and Response (SAPR) Program
      Procedures,” March 28, 2013, as amended




Change 2, 03/31/2017                           3                         ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall:

    a. Develop and maintain this Instruction and ensure DoD Component compliance with its
policies.

   b. Collaborate with the Military Departments to establish procedures and programs
consistent with this Instruction.

    c. Program, budget, and allocate funds and other resources to meet the policy objectives of
this Instruction.

   d. Ensure that information on military and civilian mental health research and programs is
exchanged among the Department of Defense and the Military Services.


2. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MILITARY COMMUNITY
AND FAMILY POLICY (DASD(MC&FP)). The DASD(MC&FP), under the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(P&R), shall:

   a. Provide through Military OneSource (MOS) and the Military and Family Life Consultant
(MFLC) Program, non-medical, brief counseling support to augment counseling provided by the
Active and Reserve Components.

    b. Provide, through MOS and the MFLC Program, personal financial counselors to augment
personal financial planning and counseling provided by the Active force and Reserve
Components.

   c. Provide guidance and technical assistance to the DoD Components in addressing
counseling initiatives.

   d. Collaborate with the DoD Components and Federal and State agencies that address
counseling; serve on related Federal committees and advisory groups.

   e. Promote general awareness of counseling programs among the DoD Components.

   f. Monitor compliance with this Instruction and periodically evaluate DoD counseling
programs in collaboration with the organizations mentioned in this Instruction.




Change 2, 03/31/2017                            4                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
(ASD(M&RA)). The ASD(M&RA), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), shall collaborate with the Military Departments and the USD(P&R) to establish
procedures and programs consistent with this Instruction.


4. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

   a. Establish policies and programs consistent with the procedures outlined in section 6 of
Enclosure 3 and ensure implementation, monitoring, and evaluation at all levels of military
command.

    b. Program, budget, and allocate funds and other resources to meet the policy objectives of
this Instruction.

    c. Provide annual education and training to key personnel on the policies and procedures in
this Instruction.

   d. Ensure leadership oversight at all levels of implementation.




Change 2, 03/31/2017                            5                           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                          PROCEDURES


1. MOS AND MFLC PROGRAMS. MOS and MFLC Program counselors provide non-
medical, short-term, solution-focused counseling and briefings for circumstances amenable to
brief intervention, including but not limited to stress and anger management, grief and loss, the
deployment cycle, parent-child relationships, couples communication, marital issues,
relationships, and relocations based on the needs of the community being served. The
counseling approach is psycho-educational, which helps participants learn to anticipate and
resolve challenges associated with the military lifestyle. This non-medical support is aimed at
preventing the development or exacerbation of mental health conditions that may detract from
military and family readiness.

    a. MOS and MFLC Programs shall implement privacy and confidentiality policies to
promote participation and reduce stigma, except to meet legal obligations or to prevent harm to
self or others.

        (1) Information disclosed to MOS and MFLC Program counselors shall be kept
confidential, except to meet legal obligations or to prevent harm to self or others. (See Glossary
for definitions of “legal obligation” and “harm to self or others.”)

        (2) MOS and MFLC Program counselors are not authorized to receive a domestic abuse
or sexual assault restricted report. If the person receiving counseling requests restricted reporting
pursuant to domestic abuse or sexual assault, the MOS and MFLC Program counselors shall
transfer the person to a specified individual who is authorized to receive a restricted report in the
respective Military Service according to DoD Instruction (DoDI) 6400.06 (Reference (c)) and
DoDD 6495.01 (Reference (d)).

        (3) At a minimum, any personally identifiable information recorded by MOS and MFLC
Program counselors is subject to section 552a of title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference
(e), commonly referred to as the “Privacy Act of 1974”) and DoD 5400.11-R (Reference (f));
however, because MOS and the MFLC Program are not healthcare programs, this information
may not be subject to DoDI 6025.18 (Reference (g)).

         (4) At a minimum, this confidentiality statement shall be provided to all eligible
individuals seeking counseling services pursuant to this Instruction: “Information you provide to
me or other counselors will be kept confidential, except to meet legal obligations or to prevent
harm to self or others. Legal obligations include requirements of law and DoD or military
regulations. Harm to self or others includes suicidal thought or intent, a desire to harm oneself,
domestic violence, child abuse or neglect, violence against any person, and any present or future
illegal activity.”

    b. MOS and MFLC Program counselors do not provide clinical therapy. Situations requiring
clinical therapy such as those meeting the diagnostic criteria found in American Psychiatric



Change 2, 03/31/2017                             6                           ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

Association Manual (Reference (h)) shall be referred to a military medical treatment facility,
TRICARE, or other providers of professional mental healthcare.

    c. MOS and MFLC Program counselors providing direct non-medical counseling support
shall have at least a Masters degree from an accredited graduate program in a mental health-
related field such as social work, psychology, marriage and family therapy, or counseling; a valid
unrestricted counseling license or certification from a State, the District of Columbia, a U.S.
Commonwealth, or a U.S. Territory that grants authority to provide counseling services as an
independent practitioner in their respective fields; and demonstrated current counseling
competence preceding their employment with MOS or the MFLC program.

    d. MOS services are provided face-to-face (continental United States (CONUS) only) to
individuals, couples, families, and groups, and telephonically or over the Internet to individuals
worldwide. MOS services may be accessed 24 hours a day, 7 days a week using the toll free
number 1-800-342-9647 or on the Internet at http://www.militaryonesource.com. Eligible
participants may receive twelve non-medical counseling sessions per person per issue.

         (1) Face-to-face non-medical counseling is provided using a nationwide network of
affiliate providers who have been screened by MOS to assure they meet the requirements of
paragraph 1.c. of this enclosure.

        (2) In addition to non-medical counseling support, MOS provides personalized
assistance with special-needs family members, child care, relocation, health and wellness,
translation services, and more.

   e. The MFLC Program provides worldwide non-medical counseling support in accordance
with these service delivery options:

        (1) Rotational. Rotational non-medical counseling support in which MFLC Program
counselors travel to designated areas to provide temporary support is available to the active force
in and outside CONUS to augment counseling services provided by the Military Departments.
Service delivery may occur on or off military installations. Non-medical counseling is provided
face-to-face, to individuals, couples, families, and groups. Rotations may not exceed 90 days.
Requests for rotational support must be submitted through the appropriate designated Military
Service headquarters points of contact to the Office of the DASD(MC&FP).

       (2) On-Demand. On-demand non-medical counseling support is provided to the Reserve
Components for mobilization, deployment, and reunion activities. Units and commands may
request on-demand support by completing a request form at http://jfsap.mhf.dod.mil/request.
Requests are submitted through the appropriate Reserve Component chain of command to the
Office of the DASD(MC&FP). On-demand support may also be requested by calling toll free 1-
888-256-9920.

        (3) Full-Time. MFLC Programs may provide full time non-medical counseling support
for special projects such as legislatively or DoD-mandated programs.




Change 2, 03/31/2017                             7                           ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

    f. Additional information on the MFLC program may be found at
http://www.militaryhomefront.dod.mil/service/counseling.


2. PERSONAL FINANCIAL COUNSELING. Personal financial counselors assist with issues
including, but not limited to, developing saving and investing strategies, spending plans,
understanding military benefits, purchasing a home, debt management, taxes, and financial
emergencies. Circumstances requiring legal assistance shall be referred accordingly. Financial
counselors shall operate in accordance with DoDI 1342.22 (Reference (i)).

     a. Personal financial management is a baseline service in all DoD family centers (Reference
(i))).

   b. MOS financial counselors are available face-to-face or by phone at 1-800-342-9647.

    c. MFLC Program financial counselors provide face-to-face support in accordance with the
rotational and on-demand service delivery options contained in paragraphs 1.e.(1) and 1.e.(2) of
this enclosure and may be requested using procedures contained in those paragraphs.

   d. Members of the Active force and Reserve Components may utilize the State and Territory
Transition Assistance Advisors to access information about local financial counseling resources.

    e. Service members covered by this Instruction who are returning from and departing for
service on active duty abroad shall be advised on actions to take to prevent or forestall mortgage
foreclosures including, but not limited to, credit counseling, home mortgage counseling, and
such other counseling and information appropriate for this purpose (Public Law 110-289
(Reference (j))). They will also be provided, in writing, notice about the appropriate provisions
of sections 501-596 of title 50, U.S.C. (Reference (k), commonly known as the
“Servicemember’s Civil Relief Act”). All members covered by this Instruction shall be advised
on actions to forestall mortgage foreclosures in accordance with section 1 of this enclosure.


3. FAMILY CENTERS. Reference (i) governs family centers.

    a. Family centers provide baseline services and may, without releasing DoD Components of
their obligations to perform functions required by statute or DoD policy, provide other support
programs including but not limited to non-medical counseling for individuals, couples, and
families.

    b. Family center staff providing non-medical counseling shall meet the criteria in paragraph
1.c. of this enclosure and criteria established by the respective Military Departments.

    c. Contact information for DoD family centers may be found at
http://www.militaryinstallations.dod.mil.




Change 2, 03/31/2017                            8                           ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

4. CHAPLAINS. Authorized personnel counseled by military chaplains in a manner intended to
be confidential, and made either as a formal act of religion or as a matter of conscience, shall be
entitled to the protections of privileged communication as delineated under military rules of
evidence (section 836 of title 10, U.S.C. (Reference (l))), applicable statutes, regulations, and
service policies. Chaplains may provide counseling to individuals, couples, families, and groups.
Authorized personnel may request chaplain counseling services through direct contact or via
appropriate Service protocols.


5. FAMILY ADVOCACY PROGRAM (FAP). DoD Instruction 6400.01 (Reference (m))
governs the FAP.

    a. FAP addresses family violence in military families through prevention, early
identification, and intervention.

   b. FAP provides support for victims and treatment for abusers, to include clinical therapy,
marital therapy, and support groups.

    c. Contact information for DoD FAPs may be found at
http://www.militaryinstallations.dod.mil.


6. MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM (MHS). The MHS ensures delivery of world-class
healthcare to all DoD Service members, retirees, and their families. The MHS provides non-
medical counseling and clinical therapy at military medical treatment facilities (MTFs) and
through TRICARE.

    a. MTFs are the primary source of specialty mental healthcare for military personnel.
Services may include clinical therapy for mental health conditions, such as post traumatic stress
disorder, major depression, and conditions found in Reference (h). They also provide non-
medical counseling for issues related to work, school, or family.

   b. Active duty Service members seeking mental healthcare through the TRICARE network
must obtain a referral from their military medical support office or their primary care provider.

    c. Dependents may receive up to eight outpatient non-medical or clinical therapy treatment
sessions per year from a TRICARE network mental healthcare provider without prior
authorization. The mental healthcare provider must seek authorization from the TRICARE
contractor for additional visits.

   d. Reserve Component members and their families may also be eligible for non-medical
counseling and clinical therapy through TRICARE in accordance with chapter 55 and section
1145 of Reference (l).




Change 2, 03/31/2017                             9                           ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

    e. The MHS mental health provider shall provide a copy of the Military Health System
Notice of Privacy Practices, available at http://www.tricare.osd.mil/tmaprivacy, to patients upon
intake for their initial care.


7. SEXUAL ASSAULT PREVENTION AND RESPONSE (SAPR). Reference (d) and DoDI
6495.02 (Reference (n)) govern sexual assault prevention and response.

    a. SAPR allows for care and services to be delivered to victims of sexual assault. Service
member victims may make either a restricted report or an unrestricted report and may receive
treatment and services pursuant to Reference (n).

   b. Only individuals specified in Reference (d) may receive restricted reports.

    c. Additional information about DoD and Military Service SAPR policies may be obtained
at http://www.sapr.mil or by calling the Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office at
703-696-9422.




Change 2, 03/31/2017                           10                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

                                           GLOSSARY

                                           DEFINITIONS


Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

child abuse. Defined in Reference (m).

clinical therapy. Therapy provided for circumstances amenable to long-term therapeutic
intervention by a clinical provider. Clinical therapy may be provided to individuals, couples, and
families. Issues such as post traumatic stress disorder, depression, traumatic brain injury, drug
and alcohol abuse, child and spouse abuse, suicidal ideation, or conditions meeting the diagnostic
criteria found in Reference (h) may be addressed in clinical therapy. This definition is not
intended to limit the authority of the Military Departments to grant privileges to clinical
providers modifying this scope of care consistent with current Military Department policy.

domestic abuse. Defined in Reference (c).

family center. Defined in Reference (i).

family member. Defined in Reference (i).

FAP. Defined in Reference (m).

financial planning and counseling. Defined in Reference (i).

harm to others. Includes circumstances indicating a danger of domestic violence, child abuse or
neglect; violence against any person; or present or other future illegal activity.

harm to self. Includes circumstances indicating suicidal thought, intent, or a desire to harm
oneself. For Service members this includes any expression of past or present illegal use of
controlled substances while on active duty.

legal obligations. Uses and disclosures of information that are required by Federal law,
applicable State law, applicable host-nation law outside the United States, or DoD or Military
Service regulations and similar issuances.

non-medical counseling. Short term, non-therapeutic counseling that is not appropriate for
individuals needing clinical therapy. Non-medical counseling is supportive in nature and
addresses general conditions of living, life skills, improving relationships at home and at work,
stress management, adjustment issues (such as those related to returning from a deployment),
marital problems, parenting, and grief and loss. This definition is not intended to limit the
authority of the Military Departments to grant privileges to clinical providers modifying this
scope of care consistent with current Military Department policy.




Change 2, 03/31/2017                            11                               GLOSSARY
                                                                    DoDI 6490.06, April 21, 2009

psycho-education. A means to educate people through counseling, trainings, or activities
addressing topics including but not limited to those listed in the definition of non-medical
counseling in this Glossary. Psycho-education helps people learn to anticipate and resolve
challenges, make informed decisions, communicate effectively, develop coping and self-
management skills, and may help prevent the development or exacerbation of mental health
conditions that may detract from military and family readiness.

restricted reporting

    Defined in Reference (c) as it applies to adult victims of domestic abuse who are eligible to
receive military medical treatment, including civilians and contractors who are eligible to receive
military healthcare outside CONUS on a reimbursable basis.

    Defined in Reference (d) as it applies to Service members who report or disclose being
victims of sexual assault.




Change 2, 03/31/2017                            12                              GLOSSARY
