SP 800-53 Rev. 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations | CSRC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 You are viewing this page in an unauthorized frame window. 

 This is a potential security issue, you are being redirected to https://csrc.nist.gov . 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 An official website of the United States government

 

 Here’s how you know 

 

 

 Here’s how you know 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Official websites use .gov A

 .gov website belongs to an official government

 organization in the United States.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A

 lock (

 

 

 Lock 

 Locked padlock icon 

 

 

 ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to

 the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,

 secure websites.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Search 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Search 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 CSRC MENU 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Search 

 

 

 Search 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Projects 

 

 

 Publications

 

 Expand or Collapse 

 

 

 

 

 

 Drafts for Public Comment 

 All Public Drafts 

 Final Pubs 

 FIPS (standards) 

 

 

 Special Publications (SP s ) 

 IR (interagency/internal reports) 

 CSWP (cybersecurity white papers) 

 ITL Bulletins 

 

 

 Project Descriptions 

 Journal Articles 

 Conference Papers 

 Books 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Topics

 

 Expand or Collapse 

 

 

 

 

 

 Security & Privacy 

 Applications 

 

 

 Technologies 

 Sectors 

 

 

 Laws & Regulations 

 Activities & Products 

 

 

 

 

 News & Updates 

 Events 

 Glossary 

 

 

 About CSRC

 

 Expand or Collapse 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Computer Security Division 

 

 Cryptographic Technology 

 Secure Systems and Applications 

 Security Components and Mechanisms 

 Security Engineering and Risk Management 

 Security Testing, Validation, and Measurement 

 

 

 

 

 

 Applied Cybersecurity Division 

 

 Cybersecurity and Privacy Applications 

 National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE) 

 National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) 

 

 

 

 

 Contact Us

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Information Technology Laboratory 

 

 

 Computer Security Resource Center 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Publications 

 

 

 

 NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Withdrawn on December 10, 2020 .

 Superseded by 

 SP 800-53 Rev. 5 

 

 

 Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations 

 

 

 Share to Facebook 

 Share to X 

 Share to LinkedIn 

 Share ia Email 

 

 

 

 

 Documentation 

 

 Topics 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Date Published: September 2020 

 

 

 

 Supersedes: 

 

 SP 800-53 Rev. 4 (01/22/2015) 

 

 

 Planning Note ( 12/10/2020 ): 

 

 See the errata update for SP 800-53 Rev. 5 that was released on December 10, 2020. 

 

 Author(s) 

 

 Joint Task Force 

 

 Abstract 

 This publication provides a catalog of security and privacy controls for information systems and organizations to protect organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation from a diverse set of threats and risks, including hostile attacks, human errors, natural disasters, structural failures, foreign intelligence entities, and privacy risks. The controls are flexible and customizable and implemented as part of an organization-wide process to manage risk. The controls address diverse requirements derived from mission and business needs, laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines. Finally, the consolidated control catalog addresses security and privacy from a functionality perspective (i.e., the strength of functions and mechanisms provided by the controls) and from an assurance perspective (i.e., the measure of confidence in the security or privacy capability provided by the controls). Addressing functionality and assurance helps to ensure that information technology products and the systems that rely on those products are sufficiently trustworthy. 

 

 

 This publication provides a catalog of security and privacy controls for information systems and organizations to protect organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation from a diverse set of threats and risks, including hostile attacks, human errors, natural...

 See full abstract 

 

 

 This publication provides a catalog of security and privacy controls for information systems and organizations to protect organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation from a diverse set of threats and risks, including hostile attacks, human errors, natural disasters, structural failures, foreign intelligence entities, and privacy risks. The controls are flexible and customizable and implemented as part of an organization-wide process to manage risk. The controls address diverse requirements derived from mission and business needs, laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines. Finally, the consolidated control catalog addresses security and privacy from a functionality perspective (i.e., the strength of functions and mechanisms provided by the controls) and from an assurance perspective (i.e., the measure of confidence in the security or privacy capability provided by the controls). Addressing functionality and assurance helps to ensure that information technology products and the systems that rely on those products are sufficiently trustworthy. 

 Hide full abstract 

 

 

 Keywords 

 

 assurance ; availability ; computer security ; confidentiality ; control ; cybersecurity ; FISMA ; information security ; information system ; integrity ; personally identifiable information ; Privacy Act ; privacy controls ; privacy functions ; privacy requirements ; Risk Management Framework ; security controls ; security functions ; security requirements ; system ; system security 

 

 Control Families 

 

 

 Access Control ; Awareness and Training ; Audit and Accountability ; Assessment, Authorization and Monitoring ; Configuration Management ; Contingency Planning ; Identification and Authentication ; Incident Response ; Maintenance ; Media Protection ; Physical and Environmental Protection ; Planning ; Program Management ; Personnel Security ; PII Processing and Transparency ; Risk Assessment ; System and Services Acquisition ; System and Communications Protection ; System and Information Integrity ; Supply Chain Risk Management 

 

 

 

 

 Documentation 

 

 Publication: 

 No Download Available 

 

 

 Supplemental Material: 

 None available 

 

 

 

 

 

 Publication Parts: 

 

 SP 800-53B 

 

 

 

 Document History: 

 

 02/23/16: SP 800-53 Rev. 5 (Draft) 

 08/15/17: SP 800-53 Rev. 5 (Draft) 

 03/16/20: SP 800-53 Rev. 5 (Draft) 

 09/23/20: SP 800-53 Rev. 5 (Final) 

 

 

 

 

 Topics 

 Security and Privacy 

 

 privacy controls , security controls , security programs & operations 

 Laws and Regulations 

 

 E-Government Act , Federal Information Security Modernization Act , Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12 , Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 , OMB Circular A-11 , OMB Circular A-130 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 HEADQUARTERS 

 100 Bureau Drive 

 Gaithersburg, MD 20899

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 X (link is external) 

 

 

 

 

 facebook (link is external) 

 

 

 

 

 linkedin (link is external) 

 

 

 

 

 instagram 

 (link is external) 

 

 

 

 

 youtube (link is external) 

 

 

 

 

 rss 

 

 

 

 

 govdelivery (link is external) 

 

 

 

 

 Want updates about CSRC and our publications?

 Subscribe 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Contact Us |

 Our Other Offices 

 

 

 

 

 Send inquiries to [email&#160;protected] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Site Privacy 

 Accessibility 

 Privacy Program 

 Copyrights 

 Vulnerability Disclosure 

 No Fear Act Policy 

 FOIA 

 Environmental Policy 

 Scientific Integrity 

 Information Quality Standards 

 Commerce.gov 

 Science.gov 

 USA.gov 

 Vote.gov
