                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                           NUMBER 1000.01
                                                                                 April 16, 2012
                                                 Incorporating Change 2, Effective June 4, 2018

                                                                                     USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Identification (ID) Cards Required by the Geneva Conventions

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directives (DoDDs) 5124.02 and
1000.25 (References (a) and (b)), this Instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 1000.1 (Reference (c)) to establish policy, assign
responsibilities, and provide procedures for DoD ID cards issued to meet certain requirements of
the Geneva Conventions.

   b. Lists certain requirements for DoD ID cards stipulated by the Geneva Conventions
(References (d) through (f)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

     a. OSD, the Military Departments (including the Coast Guard at all times, including when it
is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security by agreement with that Department), the
Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant
Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD
(hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

   b. The Commissioned Corps of the U.S. Public Health Service (USPHS), under agreement
with the Department of Health and Human Services, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), under agreement with the Department of Commerce.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. DoD ID cards shall serve as the Geneva Conventions card for eligible personnel and shall
be issued in accordance with Volume 1 of DoD Manual 1000.13 (Reference (g)).
                                                                     DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


    b. The DoD ID number shall replace the Social Security Number (SSN), in accordance with
DoDI 1000.30 (Reference (h)), and serve as the Geneva Conventions serial number on ID cards
issued to eligible personnel that no longer display an SSN.

    c. DoD ID cards shall be issued for purposes associated with this Instruction and Reference
(g) and shall not be issued solely to facilitate travel overseas, base and installation access, and
other DoD business processes.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R)
shall oversee implementation of the procedures within this Instruction.

    b. Heads of the DoD Components; Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard; Director, USPHS; and
Director, NOAA. The Heads of the DoD Components; Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard;
Director, USPHS; and Director, NOAA, shall implement the procedures prescribed in this
Instruction and ensure that their supplemental guidance and procedures are in accordance with
this Instruction and Reference (g).


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective April 16, 2012.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Procedures
Glossary




Change 2, 06/04/2018                             2
                                                                                                 DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................5

ENCLOSURE 2: PROCEDURES ..................................................................................................6

     CERTAIN CATEGORIES OF PERSONS PROTECTED BY THE GENEVA
        CONVENTIONS .................................................................................................................6
     ID CARD REQUIREMENTS OF THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS......................................6
     ISSUANCE AND USE OF DOD ID CARDS ..........................................................................7
     MILITARY-CIVILIAN GRADE RELATIONSHIPS ............................................................10

     APPENDIX
       MILITARY-CIVILIAN GRADE RELATIONSHIPS FOR GENEVA
          CONVENTIONS IDENTIFICATION PURPOSES ...................................................11

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................16

     ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................16

TABLES

     1. Uniformed Services Geneva Convention Categories and Grades for POW Identification 13
     2. Civilian Geneva Convention Categories and Equivalent Grades for POW Identification .15




Change 2, 06/04/2018                                                 3                                                    CONTENTS
                                                                             DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


                                              ENCLOSURE 1

                                              REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b)   DoD Instruction 1000.25, “DoD Personnel Identity Protection (PIP) Program,” March 2,
      2016
(c)   DoD Instruction 1000.1, “Identity Cards Required by the Geneva Conventions,” January
      30, 1974 (hereby cancelled)
(d)   Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in
      Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 19491
(e)   Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and
      Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea of August 12, 19491
(f)   Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 19491
(g)   DoD Manual 1000.13, Volume 1, “DoD Identification (ID) Cards: ID Card Life-Cycle,”
      January 23, 2014
(h)   DoD Instruction 1000.30, “Reduction of Social Security Number (SSN) Use Within DoD,”
      August 1, 2012
(i)   Directive-type Memorandum 17-004, “Department of Defense Expeditionary Civilian
      Workforce,” January 25, 2017, as amended
(j)   DoD Instruction 3020.41, “Operational Contract Support (OCS),” December 20, 2011, as
      amended
(k)   DoD Instruction 1330.13, “Armed Forces Entertainment Program,” March 23, 2004




  1 Available from the United Nations Treaty Collection at: http://treaties.un.org/Pages/UNTSOnline.aspx?id=1.


Change 2, 06/04/2018                                   4                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                          PROCEDURES


1. CERTAIN CATEGORIES OF PERSONS PROTECTED BY THE GENEVA
CONVENTIONS

    a. Prisoners of war (POWs), including members of the uniformed Service and civilian
personnel authorized to accompany the armed forces who have fallen into the power of the
enemy, are protected by the Geneva Conventions in accordance with Article 4 of Reference (f).

    b. Medical personnel exclusively engaged in the search for, or the collection, transport, or
treatment of the wounded or sick, or in the prevention of disease, staff exclusively engaged in the
administration of medical units and establishments, and chaplains attached to the armed forces
are protected by the Geneva Conventions in accordance with Article 24 of Reference (d) and
with Article 33 of Reference (f).

    c. Medical auxiliary personnel specially trained for employment, should the need arise, as
hospital orderlies, nurses, or auxiliary stretcher-bearers in the search for or the collection,
transport, or treatment of the wounded and sick, are protected by the Geneva Conventions in
accordance with Article 25 of Reference (d).

    d. Religious, medical, and hospital personnel of hospital ships and their crews are protected
by the Geneva Conventions in accordance with Article 36 of Reference (e).

    e. Religious, medical, and hospital personnel assigned to the medical or spiritual care of
Service members and other persons who are at sea and who are wounded, sick, or shipwrecked
(including forced landings at sea by or from aircraft) are protected by the Geneva Conventions in
accordance with Article 37 of Reference (e).

    f. The staff of the National Red Cross Societies and that of other voluntary aid societies,
duly recognized and authorized by their governments, who may be employed on the same duties
as the personnel named in Article 24 of Reference (d), are protected by the Geneva Conventions
in accordance with Article 26 of Reference (d).


2. ID CARD REQUIREMENTS OF THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS. In order that the
personnel referred to in section 1 of this enclosure may benefit from the status accorded them
pursuant to the Geneva Conventions (Reference (d), Reference (e), and (f)), including, but not
limited to, being eligible for repatriation, each party to a conflict must furnish certain persons
under its jurisdiction with an ID card.

    a. Article 17 of Reference (f) provides the requirements for ID cards for persons who are
liable to become POWs. These requirements state:




Change 2, 06/04/2018                              5                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


      (1) The ID card shall show the owner’s surname, first names, rank, armed force,
regimental, personal, or serial number or equivalent information, and date of birth.

       (2) The ID card may bear the signature, fingerprints, or both of the owner, and may also
bear any other information the party to the conflict may wish to add concerning persons
belonging to its armed forces.

       (3) As far as possible, the ID card shall measure 6.5 x 10 cm. and shall be issued in
duplicate.

       (4) The ID card shall be shown by the POW upon demand, but shall in no case be taken
from the POW.

    b. Article 40 of Reference (d) and Article 42 of Reference (e) provide identical requirements
for ID cards for medical, religious, and auxiliary medical personnel, including:

        (1) The ID card shall bear the distinctive red emblem (e.g., red cross, red crescent).

      (2) The ID card shall be water-resistant, of such size that it can be carried in the pocket,
and worded in the national language.

         (3) The ID card shall mention, at minimum, the surname and first names, the date of
birth, the rank, and the service number of the bearer, and shall state in what capacity the bearer is
entitled to the protection of the present convention.

        (4) The ID card shall bear the owner’s photograph and either a signature, fingerprints, or
both.

       (5) ID cards shall be embossed with the stamp of the military authority and shall be
uniform throughout the armed forces.

        (6) ID cards will be made out, if possible, at least in duplicate, one copy being kept by
the home country. In no circumstances may personnel be deprived of their ID cards and, in case
of loss, they shall be entitled to receive duplicates of the ID cards.


3. ISSUANCE AND USE OF DoD ID CARDS. DoD ID cards shall be issued to uniformed
Service members and eligible civilian personnel in order to meet the ID requirements of the
Geneva Conventions listed in section 2 of this enclosure.

   a. Requirements for Geneva Conventions ID Cards for Military Personnel

        (1) A DoD ID card shall be issued to all uniformed Service members on active duty.
This card shall meet all the requirements of and will therefore serve as ID for the purposes of
Article 17 of Reference (f).




Change 2, 06/04/2018                              6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


       (2) A DoD ID card shall be issued to Reserve Components members. This card shall
meet all the requirements of and will therefore serve as ID for the purposes of Article 17 of
Reference (f), for Reservists on active duty for periods of less than 30 days.

        (3) The duplicate ID card requirements of Article 17 of Reference (f), to facilitate
identification of POWs with the POW Information Bureau as delineated in Article 122 of
Reference (f), are more adequately met by the information routinely maintained in the Defense
Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System (DEERS). Accordingly, duplicate ID cards will not be
required.

       (4) In the event of his or her capture as a POW, the Service member’s ID card shall be
shown to the capturing authorities, but in accordance with Article 17 of Reference (f), it shall in
no case be taken from the POW.

        (5) The requirements of Article 17 of Reference (f) for the ID card to contain unique
identifying information (e.g., photograph and fingerprints or signature) shall be implemented in
accordance with References (b) and (g). The unique characteristics shall be maintained in
DEERS and shall include, but are not limited to, digital photographs and fingerprints.

    b. Requirements for Geneva Conventions ID Cards for Civilians Authorized to Accompany
the Armed Forces

       (1) A DoD ID card shall be issued to all civilian DoD employees officially designated as
emergency essential as defined in Directive-type Memorandum 17-004 (Reference (i)) and to
DoD Component contractors authorized to accompany the U.S. armed forces pursuant to DoDI
3020.41 (Reference (j)). This ID card may be issued to such individuals departing the
continental United States (CONUS) to serve elsewhere.

        (2) A DoD ID card shall be issued to other categories of civilian personnel who have
been authorized to accompany the U.S. armed forces and who are at risk of capture and detention
by the enemy as POWs. This ID card may be issued to such individuals departing CONUS to
serve elsewhere.

        (3) For civilian personnel authorized to accompany U.S. armed forces, the requirement
for a duplicate ID card in Article 17 of Reference (f) to facilitate identification of POWs with the
POW Information Bureau as delineated in Article 122 of Reference (f), is more adequately met
by the information routinely maintained in DEERS. Accordingly, duplicate ID cards will not be
prepared.

        (4) In the event of his or her capture as a POW, the civilian’s ID card shall be shown to
the capturing authorities, but in accordance with Article 17 of Reference (f), it shall in no case be
taken from the POW.

        (5) The requirements of Article 17 of Reference (f) for the ID card to contain unique
identifying information shall be implemented in accordance with References (b) and (g). The




Change 2, 06/04/2018                              7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


unique characteristics shall be maintained in DEERS and shall include, but are not limited to,
digital photographs and fingerprints.

   c. Requirements for Geneva Conventions ID Cards for Medical and Religious Personnel and
Auxiliary Medical Personnel

       (1) A DoD ID card shall be issued to medical, religious, and auxiliary medical personnel
described in section 1 of this enclosure by their DoD Component.

           (a) In the case of military medical and religious personnel, the DoD ID card issued in
accordance with paragraph 3.a. of this enclosure shall be used to meet the requirements of
Article 40 of Reference (d) and Article 42 of Reference (e). A duplicate card need not be issued,
since documentation of their status is readily available in DEERS.

           (b) In the case of civilian medical and religious personnel, this card shall be issued if
the individual is not already eligible for a DoD ID card in accordance with paragraph 3.b. of this
enclosure. If eligible:

                1. The DoD ID card issued in accordance with paragraph 3.b. of this enclosure
shall be used to meet the requirements of Article 40 of Reference (d) and Article 42 of Reference
(e).

               2. A duplicate card need not be issued since documentation of their status is
readily available in DEERS and will be provided to the voluntary aid society to which the
individual belongs.

           (c) In the case of military auxiliary medical personnel, a duplicate card need not be
issued since the additional role, and subsequent withdrawal after the assignment is terminated, is
managed in DEERS.

            (d) The requirements of Article 17 of Reference (f) for the ID card to contain unique
identifying information shall be implemented in accordance with References (b) and (g). The
unique characteristics shall be maintained in DEERS and shall include, but are not limited to,
digital photographs and fingerprints.

       (2) The DoD ID card shall distinguish the affiliation and role of the card holder.

           (a) DoD ID cards for military medical and religious personnel shall distinguish the
parent Service of the card holder and medical or religious role (e.g., “U.S. Navy Medical,” “U.S.
Air Force Religious”).

            (b) DoD ID cards for military auxiliary medical personnel shall distinguish the parent
Service of the card holder and “Medical Auxiliary” as the role. This applies to personnel
specially trained for employment, should the need arise, as trained hospital orderlies, trained
ambulance drivers, etc.




Change 2, 06/04/2018                             8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


           (c) DoD ID cards for civilian medical and religious personnel shall include the name
of the voluntary aid society recognized and authorized by the United States and the role of the
card holder (e.g., “American Red Cross Medical”).

       (3) The ID card shall contain the distinctive red emblem in accordance with Article 40 of
Reference (d) and Article 42 of Reference (e).


4. MILITARY-CIVILIAN GRADE RELATIONSHIPS. Military-civilian equivalent grade
relationships have been developed to conform with the rank categories prescribed in Article 60
of Reference (f), for monthly advances of pay to POWs, and to facilitate treatment of POWs with
due regard to rank in accordance with Article 43 of Reference (f). These relationships are based
largely upon congressional action in establishing grade and compensation for military and
civilian employees.

    a. The rank equivalencies set forth in the Appendix to this enclosure will be used throughout
the DoD for POW identification purposes. The assignment of excessively high rank equivalence
shall be avoided.

        (1) With the exception of contractors, the equivalent rank for all categories of civilian
personnel shall be printed on the ID card when it can be established via an authoritative data
source, such as a letter or data feed from the sponsoring organization.

        (2) When an equivalent rank cannot be established by an authoritative data source, the
rank of “Other” shall be printed on the card and a Geneva Convention Category of III or IV shall
be assigned as shown in column 8 of Table 2 of the Appendix.

       (3) For contractors, the rank of “Other” shall always be printed on the card, and a
Geneva Convention Category of III or IV shall be assigned as shown in column 8 of Table 2 of
the Appendix.

    b. The rank equivalencies do not convey to civilian personnel rank or authority over military
personnel. It is not the intent of this Instruction to require the use of those grade relationships for
any other purpose; however, the table was coordinated with similar tables for precedence,
housing entitlement, and other purposes to seek consistency to the extent possible.




Change 2, 06/04/2018                              9                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


                                APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 2

              MILITARY-CIVILIAN GRADE RELATIONSHIPS FOR GENEVA
                    CONVENTIONS IDENTIFICATION PURPOSES


Table 1 provides the list of Geneva Conventions categories for uniformed Service personnel.
Civilians authorized by a DoD Component to accompany the U.S. armed forces will be placed in
categories listed in Table 2 in accordance with the guidelines in paragraphs a. through i. of this
appendix. The assignment of excessively high Geneva Convention category and rank
equivalence shall be avoided.

    a. Federal Employees. Experts, consultants, and other special categories of personnel
directly employed by the Federal Government will be assigned by the sponsoring DoD
Component to an appropriate Geneva Convention Category, normally in the range of categories I
through IV, based on a salary or grade comparison with civilian employees listed in columns 4,
5, and 6 of Table 2.

    b. Foreign Service Personnel. Personnel in the Foreign Service will be assigned by the
sponsoring DoD Component to the appropriate category based on direct salary comparisons with
the General Schedule (GS) classification listed in column 3 of Table 2.

    c. Nonappropriated Fund (NAF) Employees. NAF employees will be assigned by the DoD
Component concerned to the category based upon their GS equivalent, NAF, Army and Air
Force Exchange Service salary, wage, or hourly classification. Those not so classified will be
assigned to an appropriate equivalent, normally in the range of categories I through IV, based on
a grade comparison with civilian employees listed in columns 3 through 6 of Table 2.

    d. Contractors and Other Non-Federal Employees. Advisors, observers, contractor
representatives and employees, representatives of religious organizations, and similar categories
of non-Federal personnel will be assigned by the DoD Component concerned to an appropriate
category, normally in the range of categories III through IV, based upon the individual’s standing
in his or her profession or line of work and the difficulty and responsibility of the duties to be
performed (e.g., supervisory or non-supervisory).

    e. Service Organization Employees. Employees of service organizations, such as the United
Service Organizations (USO) and Salvation Army, will be assigned by the DoD Component
concerned to an appropriate category, normally in the range of categories III and IV, as shown in
column 9 of Table 2, based on a salary or grade comparison with civilian employees listed in
columns 3 through 6 of the Table 2.

    f. Professional Entertainers. Professional entertainers will be assigned to the appropriate
category by the Department of the Army, acting for the DoD in accordance with DoDI 1330.13
(Reference (k)). Rank equivalency normally will be determined from column 8 of Table 2 with
the recommendation of the USO, based upon the professional standing of the individual in the
entertainment field.



Change 2, 06/04/2018                            10              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012



    g. American Red Cross (ARC) Personnel. ARC personnel serving with the U.S. armed
forces, including those in the medical and religious personnel category, will be assigned to the
category corresponding to the comparable GS grade authorized for travel or housing purposes, as
shown in column 7 of Table 2, by the major overseas military commander within whose
jurisdiction they are permanently assigned. The Department of the Army will act for the DoD in
sponsoring staff members designated by American Red Cross Headquarters.

   h. News Media Representatives. Accredited news media representatives will be assigned
Geneva Conventions Category IV without determination of specific rank equivalency.

    i. Local Hires. Persons locally hired in foreign areas may be assigned to categories
determined by the military commanders concerned. Categories in the range of I through IV are
normally considered appropriate.




Change 2, 06/04/2018                          11               APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                                                                    DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


                   Table 1. Uniformed Services Geneva Convention Categories and Grades for POW Identification


 Category   Grade                Army             Navy, USCG, NOAA                Air Force          Marine Corps                    PHS
    1         2                   3A                      3B                         3C                  3D                           3D
            O-10       General                   Admiral                    General              General                   Assistant Secretary

    V        O-9       Lieutenant General        Vice Admiral               Lieutenant General   Lieutenant General        Surgeon General

             O-8       Major General             Rear Admiral (upper        Major General        Major General             Deputy Surgeon General
                                                 half)                                                                     / Asst. Surgeon General
             O-7       Brigadier General         Rear Admiral (lower        Brigadier General    Brigadier General         ---
                                                 half)
             O-6       Colonel                   Captain                    Colonel              Colonel                   Medical Director
   IV
             O-5       Lieutenant Colonel        Commander                  Lieutenant Colonel   Lieutenant Colonel        Senior Surgeon

             O-4       Major                     Lieutenant Commander       Major                Major                     Surgeon
             O-3       Captain                   Lieutenant                 Captain              Captain                   Senior Asst. Surgeon

             O-2       First Lieutenant          Lieutenant Junior Grade    First Lieutenant     First Lieutenant          Asst. Surgeon
   III
             O-1       Second Lieutenant         Ensign                     Second Lieutenant    Second Lieutenant         Jr. Asst. Surgeon

             W-5       Chief Warrant Officer 5   Chief Warrant Officer 5    ---                  Chief Warrant Officer 5   ---

             W-4       Chief Warrant Officer 4   Chief Warrant Officer 4    ---                  Chief Warrant Officer 4   ---

             W-3       Chief Warrant Officer 3   Chief Warrant Officer 3    ---                  Chief Warrant Officer 3   ---

             W-2       Chief Warrant Officer 2   Chief Warrant Officer 2    ---                  Chief Warrant Officer 2   ---

             W-1       Warrant Officer           Warrant Officer            ---                  Warrant Officer           ---




Change 2, 06/04/2018                                                       12                                 APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                                                                      DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


            Table 1. Uniformed Services Geneva Convention Categories and Grades for POW Identification, Continued


 Category    Grade              Army             Navy, USCG, NOAA                   Air Force             Marine Corps               PHS
    1          2                 3A                        3B                          3C                      3D                     3D
              E-9      Sergeant Major of the    Master Chief Petty          Chief Master Sergeant    Sergeant Major of the    ---
                       Army, Command            Officer of the Navy,        of the Air Force,        Marine Corps, Sergeant
                       Sergeant of the Army,    Master Chief Petty          Command Chief Master     Major, Master Gunnery
                       Sergeant Major           Officer                     Sergeant, Chief Master   Sergeant
                                                                            Sergeant
    II
              E-8      First Sergeant, Master   Senior Chief Petty          Senior Master Sergeant   First Sergeant, Master   ---
                       Sergeant                 Officer                                              Sergeant

              E-7      Platoon Sergeant,        Chief Petty Officer         Master Sergeant          Gunnery Sergeant         ---
                       Sergeant First Class

              E-6      Staff Sergeant           Petty Officer First Class   Technical Sergeant       Staff Sergeant           ---

              E-5      Sergeant                 Petty Officer Second        Staff Sergeant           Sergeant                 ---
                                                Class
              E-4      Corporal, Specialist     Petty Officer Third         Senior Airman            Corporal                 ---
                                                Class
    I                                                                                                                         ---
              E-3      Private First Class      Seaman                      Airman First Class       Lance Corporal
                                                                                                                              ---
              E-2      Private                  Seaman Apprentice           Airman                   Private First Class
                                                                                                                              ---
              E-1      Private (no insignia)    Seaman Recruit              Airman Basic             Private (no insignia)




Change 2, 06/04/2018                                                    13                                       APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                                                                            DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012



                             Table 2. Civilian Geneva Categories and Equivalent Grades for POW Identification

                                                      Civilian Grade Groups                                                                   Contractors
Geneva Convention       Grade                                                                                                                 and Other
    Category            Equiv.      SES/GS         Federal Wage        Teaching     NAF Pay               ARC                    USO          Non-Federal
                                       or             System           Positions     Band                                                     Civilians
                                   equivalent
         1                 2           3                 4                 5             6                   7                     8                9
         V             O-10,O-9      - - -             - - -             - - -         - - -               - - -
General Officer,       O-8                                                                        ARC President; Board           - - -
POW of Equivalent                  SES*                - - -             - - -                    of Governors                                    - - -
Rank                   O-7                                                         NF-6           Members; Senior VP;       Executive
                                                       - - -             - - -                    Senior Directors /        Directors
                                                                                                  Directors
         IV                        GS-15        Ship Pilots,                                      Senior Associates and     USO Staff
Field Grade Officer,   O-6                      WS-14 thru WS-19                                  Associates                Executives and    Supervisory
POW of Equivalent      O-5         GS-14,       WL-15, and            TP Plan      NF-5           Team Leaders and          Entertainers:
Rank                               GS-13        Production Support    Positions                   Station Managers          Appropriate
                       O-4         GS-12        Equivalents                        NF-4           Asst Station Managers     Equivalent Rate
          III          O-3         GS-11,       WS-8 thru WS-13                                                                               Non-
Company Grade                      GS-10        WL-6 thru WL-14                                                                               supervisory
Officer, POW of        O-2         GS-9,        WG-12 thru WG-
Equivalent Rank        W-4,W-3     GS-8         15,                                                       - - -
                       O-1         GS-7         and Production                     NF-3                                          - - -
                                                Support
                       W-2,W-1
                                                Equivalents
          II           E-9, E-8,   GS-6
Non-Commissioned       E-7                      WS-1 thru WS-7           - - -
Officer, POW of        E-6, E-5,                WL-1 thru WL-5                                            - - -                  - - -            - - -
Equivalent Rank                    GS-5         WG-9 thru WG-11          - - -     NF-3

           I          E-4          GS-4         WG-1 thru WG-8           - - -      NF-2                   - - -
Enlisted, POW of      E-3, E-2, GS-3 thru                                           NF-1                                         - - -            - - -
Equivalent Rank       E-1          GS-1                                  - - -                             - - -
*Reference includes Defense Intelligence Senior Level, Defense Intelligence Senior Executive Service, and Senior Leaders.




Change 2, 06/04/2018                                                          14                                      APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 1000.01, April 16, 2012


                                        GLOSSARY

                             ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ARC         American Red Cross


CONUS       continental United States


DEERS       Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System
DoDD        DoD Directive
DoDI        DoD Instruction


GS          General Schedule


ID          identification


NAF         nonappropriated fund
NOAA        National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration


POW         prisoner of war


SES         Senior Executive Service
SSN         social security number


USD(P&R) Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USO      United Service Organizations
USPHS    U.S. Public Health Service




Change 2, 06/04/2018                       15                                GLOSSARY
