                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 8320.05
                                                                                August 18, 2011
                                                      Incorporating Change 1, November 22, 2017

                                                                                          DoD CIO

SUBJECT:      Electromagnetic Spectrum Data Sharing

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for the collection,
provision, maintenance, and sharing of timely, comprehensive, relevant, accurate, and trusted
data used to characterize spectrum-dependent systems and define the electromagnetic
environment (EME) in accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5144.02
(Reference (a)) and the guidance in DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5025.01 (Reference (b)).

   b. Codifies the process for identification of all data required to conduct Joint
Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations (JEMSO) and control of the electromagnetic spectrum.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”).

   b. The United States Coast Guard. The United States Coast Guard will adhere to DoD
requirements, standards, and policies in this instruction in accordance with the direction in
Paragraph 4a of the Memorandum of Agreement Between the Department of Defense and the
Department of Homeland Security (Reference (c)).

   c. All Acquisition Category I-IV programs as well as other procurements that contain
spectrum-dependent systems.
                                                                 DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. The electromagnetic environment (EME) is a critical shared joint-use environment that
must be effectively monitored and controlled in order to enable successful military operations.
This shared environment shall be managed jointly by the DoD Components.

    b. The DoD Spectrum Data Administrator (DSDA) shall function as the data administrator
for all DoD spectrum-related data, in accordance with section 1 of Enclosure 3 of this
Instruction.

    c. A Joint Authoritative Data Source shall be established and maintained in accordance with
section 2 of Enclosure 3 to ensure DoD spectrum-related data is available, visible, accessible,
understandable, and trusted among the DoD Components.

    d. The most accurate, complete, and current spectrum-related data, whether existing, new, or
modified, shall be made available via the Joint Spectrum Data Repository (JSDR), which shall
serve as the Joint Authoritative Data Source for all DoD spectrum-related data, per section 1 of
Enclosure 3.

    e. A community of interest (COI) shall be used as a strategic approach for developing the
agreements necessary for meaningful information exchange, and doing so collaboratively across
the community of people who share a common interest. An Electromagnetic Spectrum Data COI
shall be established and function, in accordance with DoDI 8320.07 (Reference (d)), to ensure
spectrum-related data identification, standardization, collection, provision, and maintenance is
provided for meeting the needs of the Department of Defense.

    f. Spectrum-related data shall be administered in accordance with the organizational
structure defined in section 1 of Enclosure 3.

   g. Military Command, Control, Communications,and Computers Executive Board MC4EB
Publication 8 (Reference (e)) shall serve as the DoD authoritative data exchange standard for
spectrum-related data. Reference (e) shall be published in the DoD Information Technology
Standards Registry (DISR) as a mandated data exchange standard.

   h. Spectrum-related data shall be structured according to published data standards.

     i. Spectrum-related data shall be administered in accordance with DoDD 8320.02 (Reference
(f)) and section 3 of Enclosure 3.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.




Change 1, 11/22/2017                            2
                                                            DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE This instruction is effective August 18, 2011.




                                             Teresa M. Takai
                                             DoD Chief Information Officer

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 1, 11/22/2017                        3
                                                                       DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


                                                 ENCLOSURE 1

                                                  REFERENCES

(a)     DoD Directive 5144.02, “DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO),” November 21,
        2014, as amended
(b)     DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Directives Program,” October 28, 2007
(c)     Memorandum of Agreement between the Department of Defense and The Department of
        Homeland Security Regarding Department of Defense and U.S. Coast Guard Cooperation
        on Cybersecurity and Cyberspace Operations, January 19, 2017
(d)     DoD Instruction 8320.07, “Implementing the Sharing of Data, Information, and
        Information Technology (IT) Services in the Department of Defense,” August 3, 2015
(e)     Military Command, Control, Communications,and Computers Executive Board (MC4EB)
        Publication 8, “Standard Spectrum Resource Format (SSRF) Data Exchange Standard,”
        September 25, 2014
(f)     DoD Directive 8320.02, “Sharing Data, Information, and Technology (IT) Services in the
        Department of Defense,” August 5, 2013
(g)     DoD Instruction 4650.01, “Policy and Procedures for Management and Use of the
        Electromagnetic Spectrum,” January 9, 2009
(h)     DoD Directive 3222.04, “Electronic Warfare (EW) Policy,” March 26, 2014, as amended
(i)     DoD Instruction 8330.01, “Interoperability of Information Technology (IT), Including
        National Security Systems (NSS),” May 21, 2014
(j)     Department of Defense (DoD) Chief Information Officer (CIO) Memorandum, “DoD Net-
        Centric Data Strategy,” May 9, 2003
(k)     DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003
(l)     DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,” January 7, 2015,
        as amended
(m)     National Security Space Acquisition Policy 03-01, “Guidance for DoD Space System
        Acquisition Process,” December 27, 2004
(n)     DoD Discovery Metadata Specification1
(o)     Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981
(p)     DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components
        That Affect United States Persons,” December 7, 1982, as amended
(q)     Intelligence Community Directive 501, “Discovery and Dissemination or Retrieval of
        Information within the Intelligence Community,” January 21, 2009




1
    Latest version available at http://metadata.dod.mi/mdr/irs/DDMS/

Change 1, 11/22/2017                                      4                                  ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. DoD CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (DoD CIO). As the Principal Staff Assistant on
spectrum matters within the Department of Defense, the DoD CIO shall:

  a. Establish policy, oversee its implementation, and provide direction and guidance for all
DoD data sharing related to EME and spectrum-dependent systems.

    b. Develop the policies and procedures, in accordance with Reference (f), to protect
spectrum-dependent systems data integrity while enabling their sharing across security domains
and with multinational partners, other Federal agencies, and State and local government in
accordance with law, policy, and security classification, in coordination with the Under Secretary
of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)); the Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)); and the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)).

    c. Guide and oversee the formation and activities of an Electromagnetic Spectrum Data COI
to address spectrum-related data requirements and data technology evolution, and to increase
data-sharing capabilities among known and unanticipated users.

   d. Advise the Secretary of Defense on issues regarding spectrum-related data management.

    e. Collaborate with the USD(AT&L), the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other
DoD Components, as needed, to ensure collection of spectrum-related data is accomplished
during the acquisition and procurement process.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY (DISA). The Director,
DISA, under the authority, direction, and control of the DoD CIO and in addition to the
responsibilities in section 5 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. In accordance with DoDI 4650.01, DoDD 3222.04, and DoDI 8330.01, (References (g),
(h), and (i)), and this Instruction, establish and maintain business processes for the consolidation
of spectrum-related data that foster the life-cycle interoperability and supportability of
information technology (IT) and National Security Systems (NSS) throughout the Department of
Defense.

   b. Develop and maintain a spectrum-related data capture capability, supportability tracking,
and data maintenance over the spectrum-dependent system life-cycle that enables data visibility,
access, and trust throughout the DoD Components.

   c. Establish processes and assign responsibility for the creation, collection, provision, and
maintenance of a comprehensive, efficient, and effective spectrum-related data-sharing
environment.

Change 1, 11/22/2017                             5                                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011



    d. Establish, chair, and maintain an Electromagnetic Spectrum Data COI to evaluate and
resolve issues associated with spectrum-related data.

    e. Facilitate and monitor spectrum-related data compliance with published standards across
the DoD Components.

    f. Develop guidance to federate all spectrum-related data and associated metadata for their
discovery and reuse by enterprise services.

    g. Create procedures and assist in the development of policies for enabling spectrum-related
data sharing across security domains and with multinational partners, other Federal agencies, and
State and local governments.

   h. Establish a DSDA with authority to provide quality assessments and recommended
enhancements to spectrum-related data.

   i. Develop a change control process in coordination with other DoD Components to ensure
changes to spectrum-related data fields are documented and follow specific approval procedures.

    j. Identify, in conjunction with the Electromagnetic Spectrum Data COI, MC4EB, JEWC,
and other electromagnetic spectrum stakeholders, the required spectrum-related data needed for
current, proposed, and future spectrum-dependent systems to enable correct and complete
execution of all electromagnetic spectrum operations business processes. Maintain these data
requirements as published standards and ensure that data-collection processes collect accurate
and complete data and that the data collected is shared per Reference (f) and DoD Chief
Information Officer Memorandum (Reference (j)).


3. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L), in addition to the responsibilities in section 5 of this
enclosure, shall:

    a. As the DoD Acquisition Executive, ensure the policies outlined in section 4 above the
signature of this Instruction are:

       (1) Incorporated into the DoD 5000 series acquisition documents (DoDD 5000.01 and
DoDI 5000.02 (References (k) and (l)) and National Security Space Acquisition Policy 03-01
(Reference (m))).

       (2) Adequately addressed during system acquisitions.

    b. Promote innovative, spectrum-efficient technologies to optimize use and effectiveness of
available spectrum resources in all acquisitions including advanced concept development,
international cooperative programs, and evolutionary acquisitions.

   c. Provide a spectrum-dependent systems acquisition expert to support the Electromagnetic
Spectrum Data COI.
Change 1, 11/22/2017                            6                                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011




4. USD(I). The USD(I) shall:

    a. Collaborate with the DoD CIO, the USD(P), and the Intelligence Community (IC) CIO in
developing policies and procedures to protect spectrum-related data integrity while enabling data
sharing across different security classifications, and between the Department of Defense, the IC,
and multinational partners, in accordance with this Instruction and Reference (f).

    b. Provide experts on IC spectrum-dependent systems, spectrum access, and EW systems of
effects to support the Electromagnetic Spectrum Data COI to include, but not limited to,
representation from the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Geospatial-Intelligence
Agency, the National Security Agency/Central Security Service, and the National
Reconnaissance Office.

   c. Ensure spectrum-related data generated by the IC and EW are in conformance with
spectrum-related data standards, and that it is visible, accessible, understandable, and trusted
among the DoD Components.

   d. Identify authorized producers of spectrum-related data for adversary, friendly, neutral, and
commercial spectrum-dependent systems.


5. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS AND USD(AT&L). The Heads of the DoD
Components and the USD(AT&L) shall:

    a. Provide an expert(s) on their respective Component’s operational spectrum management
to support the Electromagnetic Spectrum Data COI.

   b. Provide operational lessons learned and spectrum-related data feedback to the DSDA.

    c. Implement procedures to ensure that all data generated at each stage of the spectrum
certification process is complete, accurate, and in conformance with published spectrum-related
data standards.

    d. Support the implementation of spectrum-related data sharing, including establishing
appropriate plans, programs, recommended policies, and procedures in accordance with this
Instruction, References (d) and (f), and the direction of the DSDA.

    e. Ensure that all current and future spectrum-related data assets are made consistent with
this Instruction and recommendations of the DSDA.

    f. Designate personnel familiar with their respective Component’s spectrum-related data to
serve as the primary contact to the DSDA. The designated primary contact to the DSDA shall
also identify authoritative data sources that can provide spectrum-related data to the JSDR.



Change 1, 11/22/2017                             7                                           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


    g. Ensure that all spectrum-dependent systems acquisitions submit spectrum-related data
consistent with the Component’s authoritative data source via the capability identified in
paragraph 2.b. of this enclosure.

    h. Develop processes and procedures to ensure the integrity of spectrum-dependent systems
data throughout their life cycle.

   i. Provide spectrum-related data requirements to the DSDA.


6. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, in addition to the responsibilities in section 5 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Provide an operational spectrum-related data expert to support the Electromagnetic
Spectrum Data COI.

   b. Provide operational lessons learned and spectrum-related data feedback to the DSDA.

    c. Collaborate with the USD(AT&L); the DoD CIO; the Director of Operational Test and
Evaluation; and the other Heads of the DoD Components to ensure that lessons learned from
Service, combined, joint, and coalition exercises, demonstrations, experiments, and operations
are included in Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS) analysis to
facilitate improvements in spectrum-dependent systems data accumulation and life-cycle
management.

   d. In coordination with the DoD CIO, ensure this Instruction is incorporated into the JCIDS
process.

   e. Ensure that the MC4EB coordinates and adjudicates recommendations regarding content
and definition of MC4EB Publication 8.




Change 1, 11/22/2017                           8                                           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES

1. DATA ADMINISTRATION

   a. Administration of spectrum-related data shall be executed by the DSDA in coordination
with the DoD Component’s designated primary contact to the DSDA.

   b. The DSDA shall:

        (1) Ensure that the SSRF is registered as the authoritative data standard for spectrum-
related data in the DoD Information Technology Standards Registry (DISR).

        (2) Develop and conduct spectrum-related data processes to validate data quality, and
improve them as appropriate or recommend changes to the proper cognizant data authority. This
process improvement shall provide for data integrity, reliability, and completeness of spectrum-
related data generation, collection, transfer, storage, correlation, search, and retrieval.

       (3) Develop, with the assistance of DoD Component’s designated primary contact to the
DSDA, methods and processes that enable the collection, maintenance, and sharing of metrics
addressing data integrity, data availability, and data security of the JSDR.

       (4) Provide a mechanism for operational expertise input to spectrum-related data
production and standardization.

       (5) Establish a spectrum-related data feedback mechanism to alert authorized data
producers to errors in data production.

       (6) Design, implement, and maintain the JSDR to be the authoritative data source for
spectrum-related data specifically pertaining to the management of the electromagnetic
spectrum.

        (7) Identify, evaluate, and approve, with the assistance of DoD Component’s designated
primary contact to the DSDA, the authoritative data sources to be used by the JSDR. The
authoritative data sources do NOT have to reside within the JSDR to be authoritative; however,
sufficient controls must be placed on all data sources to ensure that they remain authoritative,
whether or not they reside within the JSDR.

        (8) Provide administrative support to the Electromagnetic Spectrum Data COI and
register it in the COI directory.

       (9) Establish a review process to ensure that the spectrum data requirements are up to
date and meet the needs of the users.




Change 1, 11/22/2017                            9                                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


        (10) Maintain integrity, availability, and security of the JSDR and spectrum-related data
in transit.

        (11) Liaise and, when possible, align with other national and international organizations
for spectrum-related data standardization.

   c. For spectrum-related data, each DoD Component shall:

       (1) Establish a primary contact to the DSDA per paragraph 5.f. of Enclosure 2. Each
DoD Component’s primary contact shall be a member of the Electromagnetic Spectrum Data
COI, and be responsible for identifying the Component’s authoritative data sources to be used by
the JSDR and for ensuring the Component spectrum-related data is maintained. Once the
spectrum supportability process has been completed in accordance with Reference (g), the
Component’s primary contact to the DSDA shall assume ownership of the spectrum-dependent
system data and ensure data integrity is maintained while duplicate data for like equipment
procured by different procuring sources are deconflicted.

      (2) Notify the DSDA and update the contact information whenever there is a change to
the Component’s primary contact to the DSDA.

    d. The Electromagnetic Spectrum Data COI, in coordination with the MC4EB and other
electromagnetic spectrum stakeholders, shall define which entities (e.g., Combatant Command,
Services) should provide other types of spectrum-related data that is required to conduct JEMSO.
Spectrum-related data includes but is not limited to, unit location, platform electronic fit, and
unit table of organization and equipment. For each type of data, a data administrator shall be
identified by the Electromagnetic Spectrum Data COI.


2. JSDR

   a. The JSDR shall be designed for the unanticipated user to access and, if necessary, in
accordance with the applicable governance profile, update spectrum-related data while
maintaining overall integrity of the JSDR. The JSDR shall include but not be limited to:

        (1) Data of spectrum-dependent systems characteristics, including spectrum certification
data.

       (2) Data of spectrum-dependent tests and training ranges, including frequency clearances
and frequencies required to support new system test or emerging threats.

        (3) EME data.

        (4) Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) data.

        (5) Electromagnetic environmental effects (E3) data.



Change 1, 11/22/2017                           10                                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


       (6) Host nation spectrum coordination data.

       (7) Spectrum regulatory data.

       (8) Alliance spectrum data.

       (9) Coalition spectrum data.

    b. The JSDR shall provide common standard interfaces to enable data-pull from the DoD
Component’s authoritative data sources so spectrum-related data are visible, accessible, and
trusted throughout the Department of Defense. The decision as to which databases may be used
as authoritative data sources for the JSDR is the responsibility of the DSDA.


3. DATA ASSETS

   a. Spectrum-related data assets shall be made visible by creating and associating metadata
“data tagging,” including discovery metadata, for each asset.

   b. Discovery metadata shall conform to the DoD Discovery Metadata Specification
(Reference (n)).

   c. DoD metadata standards shall comply with applicable national and international
consensus standards for metadata exchange whenever possible.

   d. All metadata shall be discoverable, searchable, and retrievable using DoD-wide
capabilities.

   e. All spectrum-related metadata schemas shall be registered in the DoD Metadata Registry.

   f. Metadata shall include the classification level of each spectrum-related data element.

    g. Initial dissemination of EME spectrum data derived from signals intelligence or other
intelligence sources shall be conducted via authorized vehicles in accordance with Executive
Order 12333, DoD 5240.1-R, and Intelligence Community Directive 501 (References (o), (p),
and (q)).




Change 1, 11/22/2017                           11                                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


                                        GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


CIO                    Chief Information Officer
COI                    community of interest

DISA                   Defense Information Systems Agency
DISR                   DoD Information Technology Standards Registry
DoD CIO                DoD Chief Information Officer
DoDD                   DoD Directive
DoDI                   DoD Instruction
DSDA                   Department Spectrum Data Administrator

E3                     electromagnetic environmental effects
EMC                    electromagnetic compatibility
EME                    electromagnetic environment

JCIDS                  Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System
JEMSO                  Joint Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations
JSDR                   Joint Spectrum Data Repository

IC                     Intelligence Community
IT                     information technology

MC4EB                  Military Command, Control, Communications,and Computers Executive
                       Board
NSS                    National Security Systems

SSRF                   Standard Spectrum Resource Format

USD(AT&L)              Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Policy




Change 1, 11/22/2017                          12                                       GLOSSARY
                                                                    DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for purposes of this Instruction.

acquisition categories. Categories established for acquisition programs to facilitate decentralized
decision making and execution and compliance with statutorily imposed requirements. The
categories determine the level of review, decision authority, and applicable procedures. While
the description and decision authority for acquisition categories I-III are defined in Reference (l),
acquisition category IV refers to all other acquisition programs that are not otherwise designated
acquisition category I, IA, II, or III and therefore the milestone decision authority is delegated to
a level below that required for acquisition category III.

authoritative data source. A recognized or official data production source with a designated
mission statement, source, or product that publishes reliable and accurate data for subsequent use
by customers. An authoritative data source may be the functional combination of multiple
separate data sources.

COI. Defined in Reference (f).

data. Defined in Reference (f).

data administrator. Entity responsible for maintaining data integrity, data availability, and data
security. The administrator anticipates the user’s needs and provides for data access and storage,
and is responsible for the design, implementation, and maintenance of the databases.

data asset. Defined in Reference (f).

data integrity. The assurance that data is consistent and correct. Data integrity is used to ensure
that data is complete, identically maintained during any operation (such as transfer, storage, or
retrieval), is preserved for its intended use, and meets the data quality expectation.

data interoperability. The ability to exchange data across system or organization boundaries and
to have that data correctly interpreted by all parties.

data owner. Entity that can authorize or deny access to certain data and is responsible for its
accuracy, integrity, and timelines.

data producer. Defined in Reference (d).

data tagging. The association of discovery metadata with data assets.

E3. The impact of the electromagnetic environment upon the operational capability of military
forces, equipment, systems, and platforms. It encompasses all electromagnetic disciplines,
including electromagnetic compatibility and electromagnetic interference; electromagnetic
vulnerability; electromagnetic pulse; electromagnetic protection; hazards of electromagnetic




Change 1, 11/22/2017                             13                                          GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDI 8320.05, August 18, 2011


radiation to personnel, ordnance, and volatile materials; and natural phenomena effects of
lightning and precipitation static.

EMC. Defined in Reference (g).

EME. Defined in Reference (g).

enterprise. Defined in Reference (f).

interoperability. Defined in Reference (i).

IT. Defined in Reference (i).

JEMSO. Activities in the joint warfighting arena carried out by joint electromagnetic spectrum
operators (Combatant Command staffs, joint tactical forces, and others) whose objective is to
successfully plan and execute joint or multinational operations across the warfighter’s
operational environment.

metadata. Defined in Reference (f).

NSS. Defined in Reference (f).

spectrum management. Defined in Reference (g).

spectrum-dependent systems. Defined in Reference (g).

spectrum-related data. Refers to the data required to plan and execute spectrum management and
electronic warfare operations, including spectrum-dependent systems characteristics, spectrum
certification, EME, EMC, E3, host nation, alliance, coalition, force structure, platform, geo-
location information, and regulatory data.

supportability. Defined in Reference (i).

unanticipated users. Those individuals that meet the criteria for accessing a restricted resource,
but have not been pre-registered to access the resource.




Change 1, 11/22/2017                            14                                           GLOSSARY
