                      Department of Defense
                         INSTRUCTION

                                                                         NUMBER 1015.15
                                                                            October 31, 2007
                                                      Incorporating Change 1, March 20, 2008

                                                                                  USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Establishment, Management, and Control of Nonappropriated Fund
             Instrumentalities and Financial Management of Supporting Resources

References: (a) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” October 17, 2006
            (b) Acting Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DoD Directives Review
                Phase II,” July 13, 2005
            (c) DoD Instruction 1015.15, “Procedures for Establishment, Management, and
                Control of Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities and Financial
                Management of Supporting Resources,” May 25, 2005 (hereby canceled)
            (d) DoD Instruction 1015.14, “Establishment, Management, and Control of
                Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities and Financial Management of
                Supporting Resources,” November 22, 2005 (hereby canceled)
            (e) through (bn), see Enclosure 1


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

Consistent with the authority provided in References (a) and (b), this Instruction reissues
Reference (c) and incorporates and cancels the following to prescribe policy, assign
responsibilities, and set procedures for establishment, management, and control of
Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities (NAFIs), nonappropriated funds (NAFs), and financial
management of resources supporting NAFIs.

       1.1. Reference (d).

       1.2. Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer (USD(C/CFO))
and Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and Readiness) (USD(P&R)) Memorandum
(Reference (e)).

     1.3. Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and Readiness)
(PDUSD(P&R)) Memorandum (Reference (f)).

       1.4. Enclosure 6 of DoD Instruction 1015.10 (Reference (g)).



Change 1, 03/20/08
2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

        2.1. This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense
(hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”). The term “Military Services” as
used herein refers to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.

       2.2. The following funds are excluded from this Instruction.

            2.2.1. All funds accounted for under U.S. Treasury symbols (to include Defense
Commissary Agency Surcharge Trust Funds) and resources acquired with appropriated funds
(APFs).

              2.2.2. Trust funds to include patient trust funds, prisoner personnel deposit funds,
cadet and midshipmen personnel trust funds at Military Service academies, ships’ stores funds
(Navy), and Armed Forces Retirement Home resident trust funds.

               2.2.3. Contractor and subcontractor funds including concessionaire funds and
funds at vending facilities operated by blind licensees in accordance with DoD Directive 1125.3
(Reference (h)) on DoD installations.

               2.2.4. Funds of private organizations as defined in DoD Instruction 1000.15
(Reference (i)).

               2.2.5. Midshipmen's Store funds, United States Naval Academy.

               2.2.5. Chaplains’ religious funds.

               2.2.7. Employee retirement and pension plan trust funds, including those for
defined benefit and 401(k) plans, established under DoD 1401.1-M (Reference (j)).

              2.2.6. Donations to the Department of Defense or the Military Departments in
accordance with Volume 12 of DoD 7000.14-R (Reference (k)).


3. DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this Instruction are defined in Volumes 2A and 2B of Reference (k), DoD
Instruction 1330.21 (Reference (l)), DoD Instruction 7700.18 (Reference (m)), DoD Instruction
1015.12 (Reference (n)), and Enclosure 2.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:


Change 1, 03/20/08                              2
                                                                DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



       4.1. NAFs are government monies and assets from sources other than monies
appropriated by the Congress of the United States. NAFs are separate and apart from funds
recorded in the books of the Treasurer of the United States. NAFs shall be administered only
through the auspices of a NAFI. NAFs are designated for the collective benefit of authorized
patrons and the purpose of the NAFI. Individuals, units, organizations, installations, or
commands shall have no proprietary interest in NAFs or other NAFI assets.

       4.2. A NAFI acts in its own name to provide or assist the Secretaries of the Military
Departments in providing programs for DoD personnel. NAFIs shall be established for military
morale, welfare, and recreation (MWR) programs defined in Reference (g) and DoD Instructions
6060.2, 6060.3, and 6060.4 (References (o), (p), and (q)); Armed Services Exchange programs
defined in Reference (l); civilian MWR programs defined in DoD Instruction 1015.08
(Reference (r)); NAF adjunct operations to permanent change of station (PCS), temporary duty
(TDY) and military treatment facility lodging programs defined in Reference (n)); other NAF
Supplemental Mission Funds; and NAF Special Purpose Central Funds defined in Enclosure 3.

    4.3. NAFI programs and facilities shall be operated, maintained, and funded as an integral
part of the personnel and readiness program. NAFI programs are supported by APF and NAF
resources and may also be financed through private sources or commercial borrowing. APF and
NAF authorizations are identified in Enclosures 4 and 5.

        4.4. Use of APFs shall be consistent with section 1301 of title 31, United States Code
(U.S.C.) (Reference (s)), which requires that funds be used only for the purposes for which
appropriated. As authorized by sections 2491, 4359, 6978, and 9359 of title 10, U.S.C.,
(Reference (t)), APFs made available to support operations of Program Groups I, II, and V (the
“Stars and Stripes” and Service Academy mixed-funded athletic or recreational extracurricular
programs only) may be provided to a NAFI under a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) and
treated and expended as NAFs following the procedures in Enclosure 6.

       4.5. A NAFI shall maintain custody and control of its NAF resources and administer
APFs to carry out its purposes in accordance with this Instruction. The laws and regulations
concerning the authorization, availability, obligation, and expenditure of APFs shall be followed.
This does not preclude a NAFI from entering into authorized contracts or other agreements with
other entities in accordance with DoD Directive 4105.67 (Reference (u)). The Head of the DoD
Component or, for the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the Military Service headquarters
designee, shall maintain management and financial information and submit annual consolidated
financial and management reports in accordance with Enclosures 7 and 8.

        4.6. The DoD Components shall exercise the utmost caution to ensure the safety of
NAFs. NAFs may be accumulated and invested to meet cash flow requirements to finance NAFI
programs. Management of NAFs shall be based, in order of priority, on safety, liquidity, and
yield in accordance with Enclosure 9.




Change 1, 03/20/08                              3
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



        4.7. NAFs are entitled to the same protection as funds of the U.S. Treasury. The DoD
Components shall establish such systems as necessary to ensure individual fiduciary
responsibility for properly using NAF resources and preventing waste, loss, or unauthorized use.
This responsibility extends to all DoD personnel including members of the Armed Forces and
civilians paid with either APFs or NAFs. According to section 2783 of Reference (t), NAF
personnel who violate NAF regulations are subject to the same penalties under Federal laws that
govern the misuse of appropriations by APF personnel. Violations by military personnel are
punishable under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (chapter 47 of Reference (t)).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

       5.1. The USD(P&R) shall, in accordance with Reference (a) and section 136 of
Reference (t), serve as the principal staff assistant and advisor to the Secretary and Deputy
Secretary of Defense for total force management as it relates to readiness, to include quality of
life, MWR, exchange, lodging, and NAF activities.

       5.2. The PDUSD(P&R), under the USD(P&R), shall, in accordance with DoD Directive
5124.8 (Reference (v)), serve as the Principal Staff Assistant and advisor to the USD(P&R) and
the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense for NAF policy, DoD military and civilian MWR
programs, Armed Service Exchanges, lodging programs, and other authorized NAFIs. In
discharging this responsibility, the PDUSD(P&R) shall:

              5.2.1. Develop, promulgate, and monitor compliance with policy and other
guidance to ensure proper administration of NAFIs and management of their resources.

            5.2.2. Serve as the principal DoD point of contact on all policy matters relating to
NAFIs and NAFs.

                5.2.3. Establish the necessary advisory groups with representatives from the DoD
Components and the Military Services to assist in the formulation, execution, and review of
policies pertaining to NAFIs.

             5.2.4. At least annually, convene a meeting of DoD representatives to review
NAF treasury management and investment policy and practices.

       5.3. The USD(C)/CFO and the General Counsel of the Department of Defense shall
apply the responsibilities in DoD Directives 5118.03 and 5145.1 (References (w) and (x)) to
NAFIs in coordination with the USD(P&R).

        5.4. The Director, Defense Finance and Accounting Service, under the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(C)/CFO, shall be responsible for NAF accounting for DoD
NAFIs, except for the Armed Service Exchanges who perform NAF accounting and finance
functions prescribed by the USD(P&R) in accordance with DoD Directive 5118.5 (Reference
(y)).




Change 1, 03/20/08                               4
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

        5.5. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, (ASD(PA)), shall serve as the
principal point of contact on Armed Forces Information Service publications (to include the
“Stars and Stripes”) within the Military Departments in accordance with DoD Directive 5122.5
(Reference (z)). In discharging this responsibility, the ASD(PA) shall monitor and ensure
compliance with policy in this Instruction.

       5.6. The Director, Administration and Management, shall supervise and administer the
DoD Concessions Committee within the immediate office of the Secretary of Defense in
accordance with DoD Directive 5120.18 (Reference (aa)).

       5.7. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

               5.7.1. Issue policies and procedures to implement this Instruction.

               5.7.2. Establish NAFIs or, for the Secretaries of the Military Departments,
delegate the authority to establish NAFIs to a Military Service headquarters designee.

       5.7.3. Ensure that NAFI programs, facilities, and resources are planned, programmed,
and budgeted using the proper funding source and suitable combination of APF, NAF, and other
approved funding resources.

        5.7.4. Be responsible for NAF deposits and investments at all echelons, identify
fiduciary responsibility, and require the establishment of an investment oversight group for each
organization that invests NAFs.

               5.7.5. Provide NAFI oversight, appoint an advisory group for each NAFI, and
prescribe appropriate analysis and evaluation procedures and indicators to ensure each NAFI is
meeting the objectives for which established, or, for the Secretaries of the Military Departments,
delegate these responsibilities to a Military Service headquarters designee.

        5.7.6. Provide for the periodic review and audit of NAFIs in accordance with DoD
Instruction 7600.6 (Reference (ab)) and DoD Instruction 7600.02 (Reference (ac)) to ensure
continued need for the functions performed and that those needs are being met in accordance
with sound business practices.

             5.7.7. Ensure that NAF assets are adequately protected against loss through the
risk management programs described in paragraph 6.19.

       5.8. The Directors of the Defense Agencies and the DoD Field Activities; the
Commanders of the Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff;
the Commanders of the United Nations Command, the Combined Forces Command, and North
American Aerospace Defense Command; and the Chiefs of Military Missions (Military
Assistance Advisory Groups, Attachés, Missions, Contingents, or Security Assistance Offices)
shall:




Change 1, 03/20/08                              5
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



               5.8.1. Establish, manage, and control NAFIs in accordance with the regulations
of a single Military Department, normally that Department with administrative and logistical
support responsibility, in accordance with DoD Directive 5100.3 (Reference (ad)). The
designated Military Department shall coordinate reporting and communication with the
PDUSD(P&R) according to this Instruction.

                5.8.2. Submit a written request to the Secretary of the Military Department
concerned, or to the Military Service headquarters designee, for authority as prescribed by the
regulations of that Department to establish a NAFI.

                5.8.3. Be subordinate to the Military Department concerned, or to the Military
Service headquarters designee, for purposes of compliance with DoD Directives and DoD
Instructions as implemented by the regulations of that Department.


6. PROCEDURES

       6.1. Establishment, Oversight, Disestablishment, and Transfer of NAFIs. The DoD
Components shall assign organizational responsibility for NAFI administration, management,
and control.

               6.1.1. Establishment. A written approval to establish a NAFI shall specify the
purpose and function, the authorized patrons, a financial plan, and the successor NAFI. The
function to be performed by a NAFI must be such that there is a valid requirement for a separate
organizational and fiscal entity, the protection and immunities accorded an instrumentality of the
U.S. Government are necessary, and there is no prohibition by or conflict with Federal statute,
Status of Forces Agreements, treaties, or other applicable Federal regulations.

                       6.1.1.1. The NAFI shall be classified in one of the six Program Groups to
ensure uniformity in the establishment, management, allocation, and control of resource support.
Management and resource data shall be reported in accordance with this system of classification.
At least one NAFI shall be maintained for each Program Group operated. Requests to establish a
NAFI to support more than one Program Group shall be approved by the DoD Component Head
and notification submitted to the PDUSD(P&R).

                             6.1.1.1.1. Program Group I – Military MWR Programs. Military
MWR programs, to include child and youth lodging programs, are defined in References (g), (o),
(p), and (q). PCS lodging programs are included in Program Group I when operated as part of
the military MWR program according to Reference (n).

                              6.1.1.1.2. Program Group II – Armed Services Exchange
Programs. Armed Services Exchange programs are defined in Reference (l) and are considered
Category C activities. (See paragraph 6.2.1.3.)

                              6.1.1.1.3. Program Group III – Civilian MWR Programs. MWR
programs designed for DoD civilians are defined in Reference (r) and are considered Category C
activities. (See paragraph 6.2.1.3.)


Change 1, 03/20/08                              6
                                                                   DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



                            6.1.1.1.4. Program Group IV – Lodging Program Supplemental
Mission Funds. NAFIs operated as an adjunct to TDY and PCS lodging programs that generate
NAFs are defined in Enclosure 3.

                            6.1.1.1.5. Program Group V – Supplemental Mission Funds.
NAFIs operated as an adjunct to DoD mission activities that generate NAFs are defined in
Enclosure 3.

                              6.1.1.1.6. Program Group VI – Special Purpose Central Funds.
DoD Component and Military Service headquarters central NAFs that are designated as the sole
provider of a consolidated, general administrative service or function (such as NAF employee
life and health insurance and NAF risk management) are defined in Enclosure 3.

                        6.1.1.2. The successor NAFI is the instrumentality of last resort if there is
financial insolvency or disestablishment of a subordinate NAFI. Each NAFI shall have a
designated successor NAFI at the DoD Component level or Military Service headquarters level
to receive or redistribute residual NAFI assets and liabilities. A successor NAFI shall also be
designated for each Program Group at the DoD Component or the Military Service headquarters
level. Successor NAFIs may also be designated at intermediate organizational echelons.

                      6.1.1.3. Joint NAFIs shall be established by agreement between the Heads
of the DoD Components concerned, subject to the approval of the PDUSD(P&R). The
agreement between the Heads of the DoD components shall provide for inter-Service support in
compliance with DoD Instruction 4000.19 (Reference (ae)). A successor NAFI shall be
established within each of the participating DoD Components and a single DoD Component shall
be designated to coordinate reporting and communication to the PDUSD(P&R), except for
communications of the Secretary of a Military Department prescribed by DoD Instruction
1330.09 and DoD Instruction 7700.20 (References (af) and (ag)).

                       6.1.1.4. Responsibility for NAFIs of tenant units or organizations
devolves upon the command of the installation at which the unit or organization is stationed,
unless an alternate agreement is executed by the organizations concerned. Tenant organizations
shall be afforded the same facility use and program participation privileges as afforded to
organizations or units of the parent installation. Per capita funding distributions shall count
personnel of tenant organizations on the same basis as personnel of the host installation.

                6.1.2. Oversight. The Head of the DoD Component or the Military Service
headquarters designee shall maintain a current listing classifying each NAFI by Program Group,
identifying the successor NAFI, and appointing an advisory group. The appointed advisory
group shall ensure the NAFI is responsive to authorized patrons and to the purposes for which it
was created. The composition, function, and purpose of the group shall be determined by the
DoD Component concerned. Joint NAFIs shall have a governing body known collectively as the
Board of Directors. A DoD Component-level or Military Service-level advisory group shall be
designated to review central NAFIs.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                7
                                                                  DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



                6.1.3. Disestablishment. A NAFI shall be disestablished when the purpose no
longer exists, when consolidated with another NAFI, or when it is not a viable fiscal entity and
cannot maintain self-sufficiency. Upon disestablishment, excess NAFI assets or residual NAFI
liabilities may be redistributed to other NAFIs within the Program Group, or otherwise disposed
of by the successor NAFI, in accordance with the policies and procedures established by the
Head of the DoD Component concerned and DoD 4165.66-M (Reference (ah)). A terminal audit
shall be performed.

               6.1.4. Transfer. When control of an installation or organization is transferred
from one DoD Component to another or to another U.S. Government department or agency, the
disposition of NAF assets or liabilities shall be determined through negotiation. These
negotiations shall ensure a fair and equitable distribution of assets in consideration of current and
foreseeable requirements of the affected installations or organizations.

        6.2. Use of Resources. NAFI resources shall be administered in an economical,
efficient, and business-like manner.

       6.2.1. Funding Categories. Within each Program Group, activities are further classified
into one of three funding categories. The funding categories are the basis of the APF and NAF
authorizations identified in Enclosures 4 and 5.

                        6.2.1.1. Category A – Mission Sustaining Activities. Category A
activities have virtually no capacity for generating NAF revenues and are supported almost
entirely with APFs. The use of NAFs is limited to specific instances where APF support is
prohibited by law or when NAF support is essential for the operation.

                        6.2.1.2. Category B – Basic Community Support Activities. Category B
activities are financed with a combination of NAF and APF resources. Because their NAF
revenue-generating capability is limited, these activities shall be substantially supported with
APFs.

                       6.2.1.3. Category C – Revenue-Generating Activities. Category C
activities have the highest capability to generate NAF revenues and generally receive only
indirect APF support, except as authorized by law. Overseas activities are authorized limited
direct APF support. Military MWR and Armed Service Exchange Category C activities at
designated remote and isolated locations are authorized funding under Category B rules in
accordance with Enclosure 4.

        6.2.2. NAFI Facilities Funding. Enclosure 5 prescribes a single source of funding for
minor and major construction and modernization of community facilities for programs and
activities of NAFIs. Distinction is made for construction of facilities at new installations or
where expansion is required because of a mission change or influx of new units or systems.
Distinction is also made in certain instances for support of U.S. Forces deployed in foreign areas,
where DoD personnel do not have ready access to civilian community or commercial alternatives
normally available in the United States. Paragraphs 6.2.2.1. through 6.2.2.3. and the footnotes to
Tables E4.T.1. and E5.T.1. (Enclosures 4 and 5) reflect these distinctions.



Change 1, 03/20/08                                8
                                                                    DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                      6.2.2.1. The Secretary of the Military Department concerned may approve
the use of NAF funding outside the continental United States (OCONUS) for youth centers,
youth courts, and youth playing fields when APFs are certified as unavailable.

                       6.2.2.2. The Secretary of the Military Department or the Military Service
headquarters designee may approve the use of NAF funding for a temporary lodging facility in
support of TDY travel when APFs are certified as unavailable recognizing that the waiver of the
fund source will create higher NAF expenses and possibly higher lodging service charges.

                        6.2.2.3. APFs may be used in lieu of NAFs for:

                                6.2.2.3.1. Facility construction related to the establishment,
activation, or expansion of a military installation or relocation of facilities for the convenience of
the Government. In the case of installation expansion, a major increase in authorized and
assigned personnel strength over a short period of time is necessary before APF construction can
be programmed. Such expansion must be the result of a mission change or influx of new units or
systems. For example, a 25-percent increase in a 2-year time span satisfies these criteria. In
contrast, personnel increases resulting from an evolutionary expansion occurring over several
years do not satisfy these criteria.

                                   6.2.2.3.2. Replacement of facilities denied by country-to-country
agreements.

                                   6.2.2.3.3. Restoration of facilities and improvements destroyed by
acts of God, fire, or terrorism.

                            6.2.2.3.4. Antiterrorism and force protection measures required by
DoD Instruction 2000.16 (Reference (ai)).

                           6.2.2.3.5. Correction of deficiencies in life safety, force protection,
and compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (section 12142 of title 42, U.S.C.
(Reference (aj))).

                6.2.3. Private Resources. Private resources in support of NAFI programs shall be
administered in accordance with DoD Instruction 1015.13 (Reference (ak)). Donations shall be
administered in accordance with Volume 12 of Reference (k). According to section 2601 of
Reference (t), the Secretaries of the Military Departments may accept, hold, administer, and
spend any gifts, and may devise or bequeath real property, personal property, or money to be
used for real property, conditional upon notification to Congress in accordance with Reference
(k) and provided that title to the real property improvement is turned over to the Military
Department upon completion.

                6.2.4. Restrictions on the Use of NAFs. NAFs are to be used only for the general
welfare of the military community. Individuals, units, organizations, or installations shall have
no proprietary interest in NAFI funds or other NAFI assets. NAFI funds or assets may not be
transferred to private organizations as dividends or other distributions.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                  9
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                        6.2.4.1. NAFs are not authorized to be used for or to support command
representation or protocol functions; scholarships, free mailing and/or postage, or any other
specific benefit for select individuals or groups; public affairs, medical, religious, or other
activities or programs outside the purposes for which the NAFI was established; or to pay for
employees not performing duties directly related to the NAFI functions or mission.

                       6.2.4.2. A building, facility, or structure constructed, improved, or
purchased using NAFs shall not be diverted to a use other than in direct support of the purpose
for which it was acquired without the prior concurrence of the Head of the DoD Component or
the Military Service headquarters designee.

                6.2.5. Membership of personnel in professional organizations may be authorized
in accordance with DoD 5500.7-R (Reference (al)). NAFs may pay the cost of organizational or
position memberships (but not individual memberships) when beneficial to the NAFI. NAFs
may pay the cost for NAF employees to obtain professional credentials, including expenses for
professional accreditation, State-imposed and professional licenses, and professional certification
and examinations to obtain such credentials when beneficial to the NAFI, consistent with section
5757 of title 5, U.S.C. (Reference (am)).

               6.2.6. NAF employees may be authorized housing or a housing allowance in
overseas areas in accordance with Reference (j) and DoD 4165.63-M (Reference (an)).
Occupancy by NAF employees shall be on a reimbursable basis in accordance with paragraph
060106 C.1.b.(1), Volume 2B of Reference (k). The employing Military Service shall fund the
housing costs with APFs or NAFs depending upon the funding authorized for the employee’s
position. Authorities for foreign allowances are prescribed by References (j) and (am).

                6.2.7. Program Group I, II, III, and IV NAFIs at the consolidated Military Service
level and individual Program Group V and VI NAFIs shall achieve, as a minimum, a break-even
or positive net income for each fiscal year (FY) sufficient to provide for NAF capital
requirements.

                6.2.8. A NAFI contractor or concessionaire selling or providing authorized
services is authorized the same APF support as activities operated by a NAFI.

       6.3. Planning, Programming, and Budgeting. Resources shall be planned, programmed,
and budgeted to implement NAFI objectives. Actual performance shall be regularly compared to
budgets and action taken to correct unfavorable variances.

               6.3.1. APF support of NAFIs shall be planned, programmed, and budgeted in
accordance with Program and Budget Review Submission procedures in Volumes 2A and 2B of
Reference (k).

               6.3.2. NAF budgets shall be updated annually to provide financial data to
managers and commanders for management decision making. The DoD Component shall
determine the format, provided that data allows for management analysis of each funding
category within a Program Group, for budget-to-actual comparisons to financial statements, and
for evaluation of performance against program plans. The following budgets shall be prepared
for each NAFI.


Change 1, 03/20/08                              10
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



                   6.3.2.1. Operating Budgets. The operating budgets shall project NAF
income and NAF expenses.

                       6.3.2.2. Capital Budgets. Expenditures shall be budgeted for acquisition
and replacement of fixed assets and the construction, sustainment, restoration, and modernization
of facilities. The budget shall indicate the source of funding (APF, NAF, or other funding).

                      6.3.2.3. Cash Budgets. The cash budgets shall show the existing NAF
cash resources (cash and investments), anticipated receipts and disbursements, and forecast cash
balances.

       6.4. Accounting

                6.4.1. APF Accounting Systems. APF accounting systems provide financial data
to satisfy the accounting and reporting requirements of Volumes 4 and 6A of Reference (k).

               6.4.2. NAF Accounting Systems. NAF accounting systems must comply with
generally- accepted accounting principles in accordance with accounting standards promulgated
by the Financial Accounting Standards Board. Accounting records shall provide the detail
necessary to report and adequately support the funding categories, activities, and income and
expense data of each Program Group as prescribed by Enclosure 8, and shall meet managerial
reporting requirements established in this Instruction. Separate accounting records are required
for each NAFI. Transactions between NAFIs within a Program Group shall be recorded
concurrently and elimination entries made before issuing consolidated financial reports.

                       6.4.2.1. Restricted Cash and Investments. Cash and investments
restricted for non-current purposes shall be classified and reported on the balance sheet as non-
current assets.

                       6.4.2.2. Extraordinary Items. Extraordinary income or expense shall be
shown in the financial statements separately from ordinary operations and shall be footnoted.
NAF expenses from Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) and installation closure actions are
authorized extraordinary expense items.

                        6.4.2.3. Dividends and Grants. The declaration of dividends by the
Armed Services Exchanges and the distribution of grants shall be recorded and reported as
decreases in equity. The receipt of Armed Service Exchange dividends and of grants that
support recurring operations shall be recorded as non-operating income. The receipt of grants
for capital items shall be recorded as equity transactions.

                       6.4.2.4. Equity Transactions. Transfers into and out of equity shall be
limited to net income; net losses; declaration of dividends by Armed Services Exchanges; prior
year material corrections; components of other comprehensive income (loss) prescribed by
Financial Accounting Standard No. 130 (Reference (ao)); entries associated with the
establishment, disestablishment, or consolidation of NAFIs; and distribution and receipt of
capital.



Change 1, 03/20/08                              11
                                                                    DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                         6.4.2.5. Tangible Fixed Assets. Tangible fixed assets purchased with
NAFs, or donated or transferred to a NAFI, that have a useful life expectancy of more than 2
years and an acquisition cost of $2,500 or more, shall be capitalized in NAF accounting records.
The DoD Components shall utilize construction-in-progress to accumulate the cost of real
property construction projects. Records for tangible fixed assets shall reflect acquisition cost (or
estimated value if acquired by other than purchase), allowance for depreciation, and net book
value. Acquisition cost includes expenditures necessary to place assets into use such as
installation, freight, testing, and initial training costs (other than employee salaries); legal fees to
establish title; and any other costs of putting the asset in the condition and location for use.
Tangible fixed assets shall be segregated between NAFI-owned fixed assets and those fixed
assets to which title has been transferred to the Government. An explanatory footnote shall be
included in the balance sheet for Government-titled fixed assets as follows: “The title of real
property and other tangible fixed assets financed with nonappropriated funds and reported hereon
is vested with the U.S. Government.”

                       6.4.2.6. Depreciation and Amortization. Tangible fixed assets, except
construction in progress, shall be depreciated over their expected useful lives. Depreciation and
amortization shall be established and reported on financial statements.

                               6.4.2.6.1. The DoD Components shall utilize the straight-line
method of depreciation, and shall prescribe the useful lives of assets and disclose them in the
notes to the financial statements.

                                6.4.2.6.2. The Armed Services Exchanges shall:

                      6.4.2.6.2.1. Assign an expected useful life within the following
parameters: buildings, 30 years; building improvements, 5-15 years; furniture, fixtures,
equipment, and other assets, 2-10 years; vehicles, aircraft, and boats, 2-10 years; information
technology, 2-10 years; and land improvements, 15-25 years.

                                       6.4.2.6.2.2. Compute salvage value on personal property
when it is expected that proceeds will be received from selling the asset at the end of its useful
life and when the salvage value is expected to exceed 10 percent of the asset’s cost. If the
salvage value is 10 percent or less of the asset’s cost, the salvage value is not considered material
for the purposes of calculating depreciation and is not included when determining the
depreciable base. Salvage value shall not be computed on real property assets.

                                        6.4.2.6.2.3. Commence depreciation on the date of receipt
of the asset or the date installed and ready for use, regardless of whether the asset is actually
used. In the case of constructed real property, depreciation shall commence when the building is
available for use, regardless of whether the building is fully occupied.

                                         6.4.2.6.2.4. If an asset remains in use longer than its
estimated useful life, it shall be retained in the property accountability or management system, as
well as in the accounting records, and the record shall reflect both its recorded cost and
accumulated depreciation until its disposition.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                12
                                                                   DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                       6.4.2.6.2.5. Depreciation of real property shall not be
accelerated at installations approved for realignment, closure, or restationing. Upon actual
closure of the facility, the undepreciated value shall be expensed in the applicable extraordinary
expense account.

                     6.4.2.7. Standard FYs. The FY for DoD NAFIs, except the Armed
Services Exchanges, begins on October 1 and ends the following September 30. The FY for all
Armed Services Exchanges begins on February 1 and ends on January 31 of the following year,
with a 15-day leeway authorized for the beginning and ending dates.

                       6.4.2.8. Uniform Chart of Accounts. NAF accounting systems, except
those utilized by the Armed Services Exchanges, shall comply with the uniform chart of
accounts established in Volume 13 of Reference (k). The DoD Components shall jointly
establish and maintain a uniform chart of accounts and common financial reporting procedures
for the Armed Services Exchanges in accordance with section 361 of Public Law (Pub. L.) 102-
484 (Reference (ap)). The Armed Services Exchange chart of accounts and common financial
reporting procedures shall be updated annually and submitted jointly by the Secretaries of the
Military Departments to the PDUSD(P&R) by October 1 of each year.

                        6.4.2.9. Inventory Valuation. Inventories shall be valued at cost, to
include freight, distribution, and purchase discounts. The DoD Components shall prescribe the
method for determining cost (first in first out, last in first out, moving average, etc.) as long as
the method is consistently applied and disclosed in the notes to the financial statements. The
Armed Services Exchanges shall use the retail inventory method to account for retail
merchandise.

                      6.4.2.10. Prompt Payment Act. NAFIs shall comply with the Prompt
Payment Act in accordance with part 1315 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
(Reference (aq)), and Volume 10 of Reference (k).

                       6.4.2.11. Purchase Discounts. In determining the cost of purchased
property or goods, discounts shall be deducted from the price billed and the cost of purchased
property shall be recorded net of discounts. The value of discounts not taken shall be charged to
operations in accordance with Volume 13 of Reference (k).

                      6.4.2.12. Concessionaire Operations. NAFIs shall disclose net income
from concessionaires as operating income on the financial statements. Armed Services
Exchanges shall use a uniform accounting method.

                      6.4.2.13. Reimbursements. The DoD Components shall ensure timely
and accurate reimbursements are made when reimbursable transactions are required between
NAFs, commissary surcharge trust funds, and APFs. APF reimbursable transactions shall be
processed according to the procedures in Volume 11A of Reference (k).

                       6.4.2.14. Costing and Pricing. To assist management in establishing and
costing rate and price structures, NAFIs should have data available that identifies all applicable
expenses to include overhead.



Change 1, 03/20/08                               13
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

       6.5. Reporting

                6.5.1. Internal Financial Reporting. Consolidated APF and NAF financial reports
shall be issued as often as necessary to be of optimum use to management officials within the
DoD Components and to meet the standards of fairness of presentation, full disclosure, and
timeliness. The Head of the DoD Component or the Military Service headquarters designee shall
establish procedures requiring APF and NAF data to be available in the level of detail of the cost
expense captions defined in Enclosure 7.

                6.5.2. Annual Reporting Requirements. A consolidated financial and
management report shall be prepared annually for each Military Service and joint-Service NAFI.
Each consolidated report shall contain the financial statements and reports specified in Enclosure
8. The DoD Components shall submit the reports to the PDUSD(P&R) in the specified software
and media within 120 days following the close of the Program Group FY. The reports shall be
based on or be the basis of annual financial statements that comply with the audit requirements
of Reference (ab). Any material differences discovered subsequent to the submission of the
reports shall be immediately reported to the PDUSD(P&R) and the deviation fully disclosed in
the accompanying auditor’s statement and footnotes.

               6.5.3 Exchange Sales. The Armed Service Exchanges shall report current year
and prior year monthly and year-to-date sales to the PDUSD(P&R) within 30 days following the
end of the month as specified in Enclosure 8.

       6.6. Analysis and Evaluation. The annual analysis shall be prepared according to the
procedures prescribed by the DoD Component or the designated Military Service. The
frequency and scope of prescribed requirements must be aligned to the financial management
complexity or simplicity of the various activities involved. Performance of the analysis and
evaluation function must be followed by the appropriate corrective actions. Should analysis and
evaluation indicate that planning, budgeting, and reports submitted to the PDUSD(P&R) are
materially misstated or misleading, an explanatory report shall be submitted to the
PDUSD(P&R) within 30 days of making the discovery.

       6.7. Management of Resources. Management of resources is the process of ensuring that
the proper resources are obtained and used effectively.

               6.7.1. NAF Fiduciary Responsibility. The DoD Components shall establish
policies and procedures necessary to encourage prevention and detection of fraud, waste, and
mismanagement. Policies and procedures shall also ensure prompt reporting of suspected
violations, proper investigation, and appropriate corrective action.

                       6.7.1.1. Suspected violations shall be reported and resolved at the lowest
organizational level possible. Individuals reporting NAF-related violations are protected by the
Whistleblower Protection Act according to DoD Directive 1401.3 (Reference (ar)), DoD
Directive 7050.06 (Reference (as)), section 2301 and section 7 of appendix to Reference (am).

                       6.7.1.2. The Defense Hotline Program applies to NAFs. Investigative
responsibilities and procedures shall be in accordance with DoD Directive 7050.1 (Reference
(at)).


Change 1, 03/20/08                              14
                                                                  DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



                       6.7.1.3. The DoD Components shall ensure that commanders refer
criminal activity involving NAFs to the appropriate criminal investigative agency for
investigation and prosecution.

              6.7.2. Standards of Conduct. The standards of conduct published in DoD
Directive 5500.7 (Reference (au)) and implemented by Reference (al) apply to personnel
assigned NAF responsibility or assigned to or employed by a NAFI.

                6.7.3. Internal Controls. NAFI internal control systems shall provide reasonable
assurance of the effectiveness of the organization, efficiency and economy of operations,
safeguarding of assets against fraud and abuse, propriety of receipts and disbursements, accuracy
and reliability of financial and operational records and reports, compliance with applicable laws
and regulations, and prevention and detection of fraud, waste, and mismanagement. The internal
management control program set forth in DoD Instruction 5010.40 (Reference (av)) applies to
NAFIs and NAFs.

        6.8. Cash and Investments. In accordance with section 2491c of Reference (t), all NAFs
in excess of installation cash requirements shall be transferred to a single NAF account of the
applicable Military Service. NAF accounts shall be maintained in financial institutions that are
U.S. Federally insured or designated by the U.S. Treasury. Transactions and investments shall
be limited to obligations of organizations or institutions that are sponsored, insured, or backed by
a pledge of collateral by the U.S. Government. NAFs on deposit with financial institutions shall
be sufficiently liquid to meet requirements and earn a rate of return that preserves the value of
funds invested. Cash and treasury management shall conform to the institutions, investments,
procedures, and reporting requirements in Enclosure 9. An annual report shall be submitted to
the PDUSD(P&R) in accordance with Enclosure 9.

                6.8.1. The PDUSD(P&R) shall convene annually a meeting of representatives of
the offices of the PDUSD(P&R) and the USD(C)/CFO with functional responsibility for treasury
management to review the Annual NAF Treasury Management Reports, examine the portfolios,
and make recommendations for improvement to policy. The DoD Component or Military
Service headquarters’ NAF treasury managers shall present the results of their most recent
Annual NAF Treasury Management Report at this meeting.

                6.8.2. Investment funds shall be audited by an independent certified public
accountant or an entity licensed to conduct public audits. A financial statement audit is required
annually and a more comprehensive audit to include fund administration and internal controls is
required at least biannually. The NAF investment function shall be reported as an assessable unit
in the Internal Management Control Program in accordance with DoD Instruction 5010.40
(Reference (av)). The statement of assurance and accompanying reports shall be furnished to the
investment oversight committee.

        6.9. Receivables. NAFIs may sell merchandise or services to authorized customers on
credit through NAFI credit systems, merchants’ agreements with credit card processors, and/or
negotiated universal commercial credit contracts.




Change 1, 03/20/08                              15
                                                                  DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                6.9.1. Debts to NAFIs are obligations to instrumentalities of the U.S.
Government. The DoD Components shall take prompt, efficient action to collect customer debts
and other NAFI receivables through available voluntary and involuntary means, and to provide
collections to the appropriate NAFI.

               6.9.2. The decision to issue NAFI-sponsored credit shall not be based on rank or
grade. Credit shall be issued based on total family income and commercial credit histories.
NAFIs shall obtain commercial credit checks on all new accounts and shall provide both good
and bad credit reports to the credit bureaus, consistent with section 1692 of title 15, U.S.C.,
(Reference (aw)) and section 552a of Reference (am) (commonly known as the Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act and the Privacy Act, respectively).

               6.9.3. In accordance with Reference (af), the Armed Services Exchanges shall
only use a single, joint, centrally-administered credit system as their internal NAFI credit system.
All Armed Services Exchanges shall maintain a Standard and Poors (S&P) rating. The Armed
Services Exchanges shall also include as part of their annual year-end certified financial audit an
overview report that comments on the financial status of the credit program.

               6.9.4. All NAFIs extending credit shall include the credit program in the audit
coverage in accordance with Reference (ab).

               6.9.5. NAFIs shall accept the Government Commercial Purchase Card in
activities where personal credit cards or other purchase cards are accommodated.

       6.10. Borrowing. All borrowing decisions shall be based on sound economic and
financial management factors. Commercial borrowing is authorized for DoD Component and
Military Service headquarters echelon NAFIs only. Inter-NAFI borrowing within a Military
Service shall be considered as an alternative to commercial borrowing. Loans between the DoD
Components are prohibited. Jointly-managed receivables necessary to operate the single
exchange credit program are authorized in accordance with Reference (af). All borrowing within
the DoD Component shall be reported as of December 31 of each year as specified in Enclosure
9.

        6.11. Severance and Separation Benefits. Use of NAFs to pay for severance or
separation entitlements for APF employees is prohibited.

                6.11.1. U.S. Severance Pay and Related Benefits. NAFIs shall set aside funds on
a regular basis to ensure sufficient cash availability to defray payment of severance benefits for
U.S. employees when due.

               6.11.2. Foreign National Severance Pay. NAFs shall be set aside for investment
on a regular and current basis when they are to be used to make direct payments to foreign
national employees upon their separation from NAFI employment. Funds set aside and invested
for this purpose shall be appropriately identified and restricted from other use. At a minimum,
the amount set aside on a DoD Component-wide basis must be sufficient to defray all severance
payments likely to become due at any point in time, without recourse to other NAFI assets within
the DoD Component. The DoD Components shall establish independent audit procedures to
verify the accuracy of stated foreign national severance liabilities and the adequacy of NAF


Change 1, 03/20/08                              16
                                                                   DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

reserves designated to fund the liabilities as they become due. As a hedge against foreign
currency exchange rate fluctuations, investments in foreign currency obligations are permitted in
amounts not to exceed the local currency value of the liabilities.

       6.12. Installation Closure

                 6.12.1. All Closures. Upon notification that an installation or activity is subject
to closure, including under BRAC action, the DoD Component shall immediately take action to
preclude unnecessary dissipation of NAF assets prior to dissolution of the NAFI. The successor
NAFI shall monitor the closing to ensure the prudent expenditure of NAFs and disposition of
property. A terminal audit shall be performed to identify the amount of residual NAF assets or
liabilities to be transferred to the successor NAFI. The terminal audit shall identify the book
value of NAF assets.

                       6.12.1.1. NAFI personal property assets shall be redistributed in
accordance with DoD Directive 5410.12 (Reference (ax)) when a NAFI disestablishes due to a
complete or partial closure of a military installation or a cutback in DoD personnel, except that
NAFI personal property assets may be removed at the discretion of the Military Service.

              6.12.1.2. Category C activities at DoD-directed closing installations overseas
may receive APF support authorized for Category B activities. Category C activities, including
Armed Services Exchanges and Supplemental Mission NAFIs, are authorized APFs for
management personnel, custodial and janitorial service, printing and reproduction, and supplies,
equipment, and internet operation not related to the sale of merchandise or services.

               6.12.2. Installation Closures under BRAC

                         6.12.2.1. The Reserve Account, created by section 344 of Pub. L. 102-
190, note to section 2687 of Reference (t), receives the proceeds equal to the book value of NAF
real property or facilities transferred or disposed in connection with the closure or realignment of
a military installation before January 1, 2005. Section 655 of Pub. L. 108-136 (Reference (ay)),
authorizes use of these funds without further appropriation, not to exceed $31.0 million in FY
2004, $24.0 million in FY 2005, and $15.0 million in FY 2006. Reserve Account funds may
only be used for acquiring, constructing, and improving commissaries and NAF real property
and facilities. Receipt of fund distributions from the BRAC Reserve Accounts shall be recorded
as equity transactions.

                        6.12.2.2. The DoD Base Closure Account 2005, created by section 3005
of Pub. L. 107-107, note to section 2687 of Reference (t), receives the proceeds equal to the book
value of NAF real property or facilities transferred or disposed of in connection with the closure
or realignment of a military installation approved after January 1, 2005. These funds may be
used without further appropriation only for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, and improving
real property and facilities for NAFIs.

                         6.12.2.3. Category C activities at installations identified for closure under
BRAC may receive APF support authorized for Category B activities. APFs may finance costs
that are a direct result of an approved BRAC action. Those costs include, but are not limited to,
PCS for NAF employees, NAFI unemployment and severance payments associated with NAF


Change 1, 03/20/08                                17
                                                                      DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

personnel, the employer’s share of premiums for temporary continuation of medical insurance
under the DoD NAF Health Benefits Program, and facilities construction. NAFI realignment
and closure costs are authorized funding from all BRAC accounts, not just the BRAC Reserve
Account.

                      6.12.2.4. NAFs are prohibited from funding the disposal of excess or
surplus property or unemployment compensation resulting from a BRAC action.

       6.13. Disposition of Government Property. In accordance with section 574 of title 40,
U.S.C. (Reference (az)), the net proceeds from the sale of a building or structure that was
acquired or constructed using NAF resources and subsequently sold upon disposition of
Government property, other than under BRAC legislation or an agreement with a foreign
government under global restationing, shall be credited to the applicable NAFI as determined by
the DoD Component concerned. When the DoD Component deems it uneconomical or
impractical to ascertain the amount of net proceeds, the proceeds shall be credited to
miscellaneous receipts of the U.S. Treasury.

       6.14. Retirement Plan Funding. Policies pertaining to the management, investment, and
administration of pension plans for NAF employees are contained in Reference (j).

        6.15. Foreign Currency. In foreign areas, there may be valid reasons to acquire foreign
currencies to reduce risks associated with fluctuations in exchange rates for known NAFI
obligations payable in foreign currencies, such as payrolls or construction contracts. Enclosure
10 addresses NAFI management of foreign currency.

        6.16. Regulations and Taxes

                  6.16.1. Federal Alcoholic Beverage Tax. Each installation NAFI is a separate
business enterprise and, in the case of alcoholic beverages, shall pay only one wholesale dealer
tax (if it sells only at wholesale) or one retail dealer tax (if it sells only at retail) regardless of the
number of annexes it operates on a military installation, in accordance with part 31 of title 27,
CFR (Reference (ba)). Every NAFI selling alcoholic beverages at wholesale must pay a tax as a
wholesale dealer. However, if the NAFI also sells at retail, it need not pay an additional retail
tax. Each outlet operating off a military installation must pay the appropriate tax as a wholesaler
or retailer. Every NAFI wholesaling or transferring alcoholic beverages from one NAFI to
another (except in case of dissolution of the NAFI) must pay a tax as a wholesale dealer.

                6.16.2. Federal Taxes Paid Indirectly. Taxes on articles or services must be paid
by the entity upon which the taxes are levied, whether or not the articles or services may be
furnished for the use of, or the sale in, NAFI activities. However, in general, there is provision
for exemption from these taxes when alcoholic liquors, beer, and tobacco are sold to a NAFI for
resale outside the United States and its territories.

              6.16.3. Federal Taxes Not Applicable. NAFIs are exempt from payment of
Federal income taxes and are not required to file returns.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                  18
                                                                  DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

               6.16.4. Communication With Federal Authorities. The initiation of inquiries or
replies to Federal authorities regarding taxation and regulations affecting NAFIs shall be cleared
through official channels as determined by the DoD Components.

               6.16.5. State and Local Laws, Regulations, and Taxes. Instrumentalities of the
U.S. Government are not subject to direct taxation, regulation, or control by State or local
authorities except when specifically authorized by Federal statute.

                    6.16.5.1. NAFIs shall pay State, Territory of Guam, and District of
Columbia taxes on motor vehicle fuels in accordance with section 104 of title 4, U.S.C.
(Reference (bb)).

                        6.16.5.2. The Military Departments shall determine the need for routine
inquiries to State officials on matters pertaining to taxation and regulation of liquors, tobacco
products, soft drinks, and automobiles.

                       6.16.5.3. All personnel shall cooperate with State and local officials to the
degree that such cooperation is not construed as a submission to State and local regulations and
control, and that such cooperation does not adversely affect the Department’s mission or
programs.

                6.16.6. Non-Applicable Taxes. NAFIs are exempt from the payment of State and
local taxes including, but not limited to, unemployment insurance taxes and contributions;
income taxes; real estate and personal property taxes; sales, use, and license taxes on property
purchased for consumption or resale; and excise taxes on alcoholic beverages imposed directly
on NAFIs.

                6.16.7. State or Local Tax-Free Products. Installation commanders shall
establish a system within each activity to regulate and monitor sales of tax-free cigarettes and
alcoholic beverages in NAFIs.

                6.16.8. Concession Activities. Concessionaire-operated activities on military
installations are subject to State and local sales and use taxes. The concessionaire shall report
and pay such taxes to the proper authorities.

               6.16.9. Withholding State and Local Income Taxes. NAFIs shall withhold taxes
from the wages of civilian employees for, and remit them to, tax jurisdictions wherever the
Federal Government has entered into agreements for withholding taxes. State and local taxes
shall be withheld from the pay of enlisted personnel compensated from NAFs for work
performed during off-duty hours.

                6.16.10. Foreign Taxes. NAFIs located in foreign countries shall not pay to nor
collect for any foreign country or political subdivision any tax unless the United States has
consented to levy collection by treaty, convention, or executive agreement.




Change 1, 03/20/08                               19
                                                                DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



       6.17. Distributions of Dividends. The DoD Components shall ensure that funds received
from the Armed Services Exchanges are equitably distributed by Military Service headquarters,
major commands, local commands, or a combination of these based upon demonstrated military
MWR program NAF requirements.

       6.18. Auditing

               6.18.1. Internal Audits and Inspections. The DoD Component or the delegated
Military Service headquarters shall determine and require such internal audits and inspections as
they consider necessary or desirable. Internal audits shall meet the requirements in References
(ab) and (ac). Specific items of inquiry shall be included in the Military Service Inspector
General checklists.

                6.18.2. External Audits. Each Military Service shall require an annual Service-
wide audit of its NAFIs by an independent certified public accountant. These audits shall
include the headquarters NAFIs and such intermediate-level and individual NAFIs as may be
necessary for the auditors to express an opinion on the NAFI financial statements of the Military
Services. Audits by certified public accountants shall comply with Reference (ab).

        6.19. Risk Management. Risk management programs, to include self-insurance and
commercial coverage, shall be centrally administered for a Program Group at the DoD
Component, Military Service, or Service headquarters echelon. The methods in which assets are
protected shall encompass sound risk management principles that not only protect the financial
integrity of NAFIs, but also satisfy all applicable insurance laws (both domestic and foreign) and
Federal laws, while providing the broadest, most cost-effective protection available.
Additionally, the Service headquarters or NAFIs shall not assume liability for contractors
providing services on an installation. The techniques of handling the risk of loss shall be
determined by each Service headquarters.

      6.20. Procurement Policy. NAF procurement shall be in accordance with Reference (u)
and DoD Instruction 4105.71 (Reference (bc)).

       6.21. Personnel Policy. Management of NAF civilian employees shall be in accordance
with Reference (j), DoD Instruction 1401.1 (Reference (bd)), and DoD 1400.25-M (Reference
(be)).


7. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS

        7.1. The annual consolidated financial and management report required by subparagraph
6.5.2. has been assigned Report Control Symbol DD-P&R(A)1344 in accordance with DoD
8910.1-M (Reference (bf)).

      7.2. The Annual NAF Treasury Management report required by subparagraph 6.8. is
exempt from licensing in accordance with paragraph C4.4.6. of Reference (bf).




Change 1, 03/20/08                             20
                                                           DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance is an administrative change which
includes additional language expanding the NAF funding authorization to products leaving
CONUS for OCUNUS Armed Services Exchanges. This change occurs in E4.T1.4.2.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE




Enclosures – 10
   E1. References, continued
   E2. Definitions
   E3. Lodging, Supplemental Mission Funds, and Special Purpose Central Funds NAFIs
   E4. APF and NAF Funding Authorizations
   E5. Construction of NAFI Facilities
   E6. DoD MWR Utilization Support and Accountability (USA) and Uniform Funding and
        Management (UFM) Practices
   E7. Cost Expense Captions
   E8. Financial Reporting
   E9. Treasury Management and NAF Investments
   E10. Foreign Currency




Change 1, 03/20/08                         21
                                                             DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



                                    E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                  REFERENCES, continued


(e)   Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) and Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and
      Readiness) Memorandum, “Use of Appropriated Funds for Nonappropriated Fund Costs
      Incurred in Hurricane Katrina, Hurricane Rita, and Hurricane Wilma Evacuations,” March
      23, 2006 (hereby canceled)
(f)   Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and Readiness) Memorandum,
      “Use of Appropriated Funds (APF) at Closing DoD Installations Overseas,” July 30, 2007
      (hereby canceled)
(g)   DoD Instruction 1015.10, “Programs for Military Morale, Welfare and Recreation
      (MWR),” November 3, 1995
(h)   DoD Directive 1125.3, “Vending Facility Program for the Blind on Federal Property,”
      April 7, 1978
(i)   DoD Instruction 1000.15, “Private Organizations on DoD Installations,” December 20,
      2005
(j)   DoD 1401.1-M, “Personnel Policy Manual for Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities,”
      December 13, 1988
(k)   DoD 7000.14-R, “Financial Management Regulation;” Volume 2A, August 2007; Volume
      2B, July 2007; Volume 4, April 2007; Volume 6A, December 2006; Volume 7A,
      September 2007; Volume 10, December 2005; Volume 11A, December 2006; Volume 12,
      September 2007; and Volume 13, January 2004
(l)   DoD Instruction 1330.21, “Armed Services Exchange Regulations,” July 14, 2005
(m)   DoD Instruction 7700.18, “Commissary Surcharge, Nonappropriated Fund (NAF), and
      Privately Financed Construction Reporting Procedures,” December 15, 2004
(n)   DoD Instruction 1015.12, “Lodging Program Resource Management,” October 30, 1996
(o)   DoD Instruction 6060.2, “Child Development Programs (CDPs),” January 19, 1993
(p)   DoD Instruction 6060.3, “School Age Care (SAC) Program,” December 19, 1996
(q)   DoD Instruction 6060.4, “Youth Programs (YPS),” August 23, 2004
(r)   DoD Instruction 1015.08, “DoD Civilian Employee Morale, Welfare, and Recreation
      (MWR) Activities and Supporting Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities (NAFI),”
      December 23, 2005
(s)   Section 1301 of title 31, United States Code
(t)   Sections 136, 2491, 2491a-c, 2492, 2601, 2643, 2783, 2881, 4359, 6978, 9359; note to
      section 2687; and chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code
(u)   DoD Directive 4105.67, “Nonappropriated Fund (NAF) Procurement Policy,” May 2, 2001
(v)   DoD Directive 5124.8, “Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
      Readiness (PDUSD(P&R)),” July 16, 2003
(w)   DoD Directive 5118.03, “Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) (USD(C))/Chief
      Financial Officer (CFO), Department of Defense,” January 6, 1997
(x)   DoD Directive 5145.1, “General Counsel of the Department of Defense,” May 2, 2001
(y)   DoD Directive 5118.5, “Defense Finance and Accounting Service,” November 26, 1990




Change 1, 03/20/08                           22                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

(z)  DoD Directive 5122.5, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs (ASD(PA)),”
     September 27, 2000
(aa) DoD Directive 5120.18, “DoD Concessions Committee,” January 13, 1999
(ab) DoD Instruction 7600.6, “Audit of Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities and Related
     Activities,” January 16, 2004
(ac) DoD Instruction 7600.02, “Audit Policies,” April 27, 2007
(ad) DoD Directive 5100.3, “Support of the Headquarters of Combatant and Subordinate Joint
     Commands,” November 15, 1999
(ae) DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Interservice and Intragovernmental Support,” August 9, 1995
(af) DoD Instruction 1330.09, “Armed Services Exchange Policy,” December 7, 2005
(ag) DoD Instruction 7700.20, “Commissary Surcharge, Nonappropriated Fund (NAF), and
     Privately Financed Construction Policy,” November 10, 2005
(ah) DoD 4165.66-M, “Base Redevelopment and Realignment Manual,” March 1, 2006
(ai) DoD Instruction 2000.16, “DoD Antiterrorism (AT) Standards,” October 2, 2006
(aj) Section 12142 of title 42, United States Code
(ak) DoD Instruction 1015.13, “DoD Procedures for Implementing Public-Private Ventures
     (PPVs) for Morale, Welfare and Recreation (MWR), and Armed Services Exchange
     Category C Revenue-Generating Activities,” March 11, 2004
(al) DoD 5500.7-R, “Joint Ethics Regulation (JER),” August 1993
(am) Section 7 of appendix to and sections 552a, 2301, 5595-5597, and 5757 of title 5, United
     States Code
(an) DoD 4165.63-M, “DoD Housing Management,” September 30, 1993
(ao) Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement of Accounting Standards No. 130,
     “Reporting Comprehensive Income,” June 1997
(ap) Section 361 of Public Law 102-484, “The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
     Year 1993,” October 23, 1992
(aq) Part 1315 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, “Prompt Payment,” current edition
(ar) DoD Directive 1401.3, “Reprisal Protection for Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentality
     Employees/Applicants,” October 16, 2001
(as) DoD Directive 7050.06, “Military Whistleblower Protection,” July 23, 2007
(at) DoD Directive 7050.1, “Defense Hotline Program,” January 4, 1999
(au) DoD Directive 5500.7, “Standards of Conduct,” August 30, 1993
(av) DoD Instruction 5010.40, “Managers’ Internal Control (MIC) Program Procedures,”
     January 4, 2006
(aw) Section 1692 of title 15, United States Code
(ax) DoD Directive 5410.12, “Economic Adjustment Assistance to Defense-Impacted
     Communities,” July 5, 2006
(ay) Section 655 of Public Law 108-136, “The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
     Year 2004,” November 24, 2003
(az) Section 574 of title 40, United States Code
(ba) Part 31 of title 27, Code of Federal Regulations, “Alcohol Beverage Dealers,” current
     edition
(bb) Section 104 of title 4, United States Code
(bc) DoD Instruction 4105.71, “Nonappropriated Fund (NAF) Procurement Procedure,”
     February 26, 2001




Change 1, 03/20/08                            23                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

(bd) DoD Instruction 1401.1, “Personnel Policy for Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities
     (NAFIs),” November 15, 1985
(be) DoD 1400.25-M, “Department of Defense Civilian Personnel Manual (CPM),” December
     3, 1996
(bf) DoD 8910.1-M, “DoD Procedures for Management of Information Requirements,” June 30,
     1998
(bg) DoD Instruction 4165.71, “Real Property Acquisition,” January 6, 2005
(bh) DoD 5200.2-R, “Personnel Security Program,” January 16, 1987
(bi) DoD Directive 4500.9E, “Transportation and Traffic Management,” September 11, 2007
(bj) DoD Instruction 1330.20, “Reporting of Morale, Welfare, and Recreational (MWR)
     Activities Personnel Information,” September 4, 1980
(bk) DoD Directive 1000.11, “Financial Institutions on DoD Installations,” June 9, 2000
(bl) Section 1832(a) of title 12, United States Code
(bm) Part 202 of title 31, Code of Federal Regulations, “Depositaries and Financial Agents of the
     Federal Government,” current edition
(bn) Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement of Accounting Standard No. 133,
     “Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities,” June 1998




Change 1, 03/20/08                             24                        ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



                                       E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                                          DEFINITIONS


E2.1. APFs. Monies provided by the Congress, under statutory authority, from the U.S.
Treasury for specified purposes.

E2.2. Common Support. APF and NAF support used to perform the general management or
administration of more than one Program Group or funding category within a Program Group at
installation, major command, or Service headquarters level, and that is not easily or readily
identifiable to a specific program. Common support does not include services performed by
Program Group VI NAFIs. Examples of common support are central financial management and
civilian personnel office functions; executive control and essential command supervision
(ECECS) functions; common warehousing, marketing, or maintenance functions; and central
accounting and payroll, information system, and procurement processing functions.

E2.3. Continental United States (CONUS). For the purposes of this Instruction, CONUS is
defined as the 48 contiguous United States and the District of Columbia.

E2.4. Custodian or Fund Manager. The individual appointed by written authority to a position
of responsibility and trust to exercise administrative and executive control of a NAFI and
charged with fiduciary responsibility for NAF resources.

E2.5. DoD Personnel. Military personnel, including members of the Reserve Components, and
DoD civilian employees paid from either APFs or NAFs.

E2.6. ECECS. Managerial positions at an installation, major command, or Military Service
headquarters located above the direct program managerial and operational level of individual
NAFI programs. These positions support planning, organizing, directing, coordinating, and
controlling the overall operations of NAFI programs. ECECS specifically consists of program,
fiscal, logistical, and other management functions required to ensure fiscal and management
oversight.

E2.7. Extraordinary Items. Events and transactions distinguished by their unusual nature, the
infrequency of their occurrence, and their significant difference from the customary business
operation.

E2.8. Financial Derivative. A financial contract that has its price derived from, and that depends
upon, the price of an underlying asset.

E2.9. Installation. For the purposes of this Instruction, installation is defined as any real
property or area that is controlled, owned, or leased by the Department of Defense.




Change 1, 03/20/08                               25                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

E2.10. Leveraged Investing. An activity that magnifies the risk and reward trade-off of an
investment by borrowing funds or through the use of derivatives.

E2.11. Major Construction. For the purposes of this Instruction, major construction is defined
as a construction project with a construction cost as outlined in Reference (k) for military
construction (MILCON) appropriations and Reference (m) for NAF major construction.

E2.12. Minor Construction. For the purposes of this Instruction, minor construction is defined
as a construction project with a construction cost that does not exceed the limits for minor
construction as outlined in Reference (k) for MILCON and Reference (m) for NAF minor
construction.

E2.13. NAFI. A DoD organizational and fiscal entity supported in whole or in part by NAFs. A
NAFI, as an instrumentality of the U.S. Government, enjoys the same immunities and privileges
as the U.S. Government in the absence of specific Federal statute. It is not incorporated under
the law of any State, but has the legal status of an instrumentality of the United States.

E2.14. OCONUS. For the purposes of this Instruction, OCONUS is defined as areas other than
the 48 contiguous United States and the District of Columbia.

E2.15. Overseas. For the purposes of this Instruction, overseas is defined as areas other than the
50 United States and the District of Columbia.

E2.16. Personal Property. Tangible fixed assets that are not land or part of a building or its
installed equipment.

E2.17. Portfolio Expenses. For the purposes of this Instruction, portfolio expenses include those
expenses directly attributable to the placement of investments and the generation of investment
income. Includes but not limited to portfolio managers' expenses, investment consultant
expenses, investment software, audits, financial evaluation services and safekeeping custodial
fees.

E2.18. Resale. The acquisition and resale of merchandise and services conducted by NAFI
programs or their concessionaires. Specifically excluded from this definition are user fees,
interest, funds provided from APFs, and other sources of income not directly related to the sale
or resale of merchandise and services.

E2.19. Retail Inventory Method. A method of estimating inventory cost based on the ratio of
cost to retail (selling) price. This ratio is referred to as the cost retail ratio or cost complement.
Inventories valued at retail are converted to estimated cost by applying the cost retail ratio or
percentage. To avoid distortions arising from different product mixes or margins, a separate
calculation is generally performed for each department.

E2.20. Service Headquarters. Headquarters organizations that have managerial responsibility
for NAFIs within the Military Services.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                 26                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

E2.21. Special Purpose Central Funds. NAFIs established for a specific general and
administrative purpose to support more than one Program Group. Examples include NAF self-
insurance funds, NAF central construction funds, and NAF employee life and health insurance.

E2.22. Successor NAFI. A NAFI designated to provide financial support and assistance, receive
or redistribute excess assets, and assume residual liabilities of an assigned NAFI.

E2.23. Supplemental Mission Fund. A NAFI designated to receive NAFs generated as the result
of installation operation of mission programs such as training, food service, education, and
security. Examples include the Athletic Association Fund and Dependent Schools Funds.

E2.24. Tangible Fixed Assets. Includes land, buildings, and other structures; additions to
buildings; nonstructural improvements to include landscaping, fences, sewers, wells, and
reservoirs; fixed equipment such as elevators, plumbing, power-plant boilers, fire and intrusion
detection/alarm systems, lighting, heating, and air conditioning; and fixed infrastructure such as
cabling, wiring, and conduit that supports telecommunications and information technology
systems. Includes design modification, contract administration, inspection, supervision of
construction, and other related costs; minor construction; furniture, fixtures, and equipment;
construction in progress; capital leases; information technology moveable equipment,
commercial off-the-shelf software, licenses and all other related hardware and software
components; and capitalized sustainment, restoration, and modernization.

E2.25. Treasury Management. The management of cash, bank accounts, investments,
borrowing, lending, foreign exchange, interest rate risk, liquidity, and credit risk.

E2.26. United States. For the purposes of this Instruction, the United States is defined as the 50
States and the District of Columbia.




Change 1, 03/20/08                              27                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                      E3. ENCLOSURE 3

                   LODGING, SUPPLEMENTAL MISSION FUNDS, AND
                     SPECIAL PURPOSE CENTRAL FUNDS NAFIS


E3.1. ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM GROUPS IV, V, AND VI NAFIS. A separate NAFI
shall be established for each mission activity within Program Group IV – Lodging, Program
Group V – Supplemental Mission Funds, and Program Group VI – Special Purpose Central
Funds. NAFs generated and their expenditure are restricted to the purposes of the NAFI.


E3.2. LODING AND SUPPLEMENT MISSION FUNDS NAFIs. NAFIs shall be established as
Program Group V – Supplemental Mission Funds in circumstances where NAFs are generated
by programs operated as an adjunct to DoD mission activities such as training, education, food
service, transportation, and security activities. NAFIs established as adjuncts to the TDY and
PCS lodging program and to Military Treatment Facilities such as Fisher Houses and
Nightingale Houses shall be classified as Program Group IV – Lodging Programs. A
Supplemental Mission Fund cannot support programs properly classified in Program Groups I,
II, III, or VI.

    E3.2.1. NAFs may be used only to provide quality-of-life services as adjuncts to mission
activities. NAFs are authorized to support the operational functions of the Supplemental Mission
Fund, such as procurement of items for resale and management of NAF resources. NAFs shall
not be used to support training, lodging, food service, security, or other mission activities.

   E3.2.2. Program Group IV and V NAFIs are authorized APF and NAF support as Category
C activities in Enclosure 4, except that the “Stars and Stripes” is authorized APF and NAF
support as a Category B activity. Fisher Houses may be provided base operating support in
accordance with section 2492 of Reference (t).

    E3.2.3. APF support of Program Group V – Supplemental Mission Funds shall be reported
as required in Enclosure 8 only to the extent that it relates directly to NAFI-operated functions.
For example, APF costs of operating mission activities (training, food service, education, and
security) shall not be reported. However, APF support to the NAFI shall be reported, including
prorated portions of the costs APF-funded personnel who perform collateral duties of collecting,
accounting, or disbursing NAFs.

   E3.2.4. The following list provides examples of Program Group V – Supplemental Mission
Funds and is not intended to be all-inclusive.

       E3.2.4.1. Dining Hall Fund.

       E3.2.4.2. Dependent Schools Fund.

       E3.2.4.3. In-Flight Services Fund.

       E3.2.4.4. Military Museum/Historical Fund.
Change 1, 03/20/08                              28                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



       E3.2.4.5. Vehicle Registration Fund.

       E3.2.4.6. Academic Support Fund.

       E3.2.4.7. Commandant’s School Fund.

       E3.2.4.8. Special Learning Center Fund.

       E3.2.4.9. Cadet Restaurant Fund.

       E3.2.4.10. Athletic Association Fund.

       E3.2.4.11. U.S. Disciplinary Barracks Fund.

       E3.2.4.12. “Stars and Stripes.”


E3.3. SPECIAL PURPOSE CENTRAL FUNDS. A NAFI shall be established in Program
Group VI – Special Purpose Central Funds when it is designated as the sole provider of a
consolidated NAF function for the DoD Component or Military Service (such as construction,
accounting, procurement, personnel administration, employee health and life insurance, and risk
management). NAFIs established in Program Group VI shall be managed at the DoD
Component or Military Service headquarters level; the service or function shall not be replicated
at another echelon or element within the organization.

   E3.3.1. Special Purpose Central Funds provide services to more than one Program Group.
Central NAFIs that support a single Program Group shall be designated and reported within that
Program Group. Common support functions not provided through a Program Group VI –
Special Purpose Central Fund shall be reimbursed or prorated to the benefiting activities.

    E3.3.2. Expenses are generally recovered through premiums or assessments charged or
offset against earnings prior to distribution. Special Purpose Central Funds are authorized APF
and NAF support for Category C programs as indicated in Enclosure 4 and shall be reported as
Category C activities on Schedule A.

    E3.3.3. The following list provides examples of Special Purpose Central Funds and is not
intended to be all-inclusive.

       E3.3.3.1. NAF Employee Group Health Insurance Fund.

       E3.3.3.2. NAF Employee Group Life Insurance Fund.

       E3.3.3.3. NAF Risk Management Insurance Fund.

       E3.3.3.4. NAF Central Banking or Investment Fund.



Change 1, 03/20/08                             29                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                        DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                           E4. ENCLOSURE 4

                           APF AND NAF FUNDING AUTHORIZATIONS

                  Table E4.T1. General Funding Authorizations for NAFI Activities

             Element of Resource                                    APF                             NAF
                                                   Category       Category        Category
                                                      A              B             C1, 2, 3
E4.T1.1. MILITARY PERSONNEL
                                                                                               Not
  E4.T1.1.1. ECECS.                             Authorized      Authorized     Authorized      Applicable
  E4.T1.1.2. All other personnel.               Authorized      Authorized     Not             Not
                                                                               Authorized4     Applicable5
E4.T1.2. CIVILIAN PERSONNEL                                                    Authorized
                                                                               except Armed
  E4.T1.2.1. Permanent Assignment Utilization                                  Service
     E4.T1.2.1.1. ECECS.                        Authorized      Authorized     Exchanges       Authorized
                                                                               unless
                                                                               authorized by
                                                                               footnote 6
     E4.T1.2.1.2. Personnel performing               Authorized    Authorized  Not              Authorized
managerial functions or requiring technical and/or                             Authorized6
professional qualifications. Also personnel
accountable for APF resources and the protection
of the interest of the Federal Government.
     E4.T1.2.1.3. Personnel directly and primarily Not Authorized Not Authorized Not Authorized Authorized
involved in resale.
     E4.T1.2.1.4. All other personnel.               Authorized    Authorized    Not Authorized Authorized
   E4.T1.2.2. Additional and Collateral Duties.      Authorized    Authorized     Authorized6   Not Applicable
Applies to APF employees who are assigned
duties on an additional or collateral duty basis.
These duties shall be in addition to the civilian
employee's primary duty assignment and may be
of an ECECS or operational nature.
   E4.T1.2.3. TDY. Participants in athletic,         Authorized    Authorized    Not Authorized Not Applicable
recreation, and entertainment events conducted as
part of the MWR program. Includes international
and national sports competitions authorized by
statute and other DoD issuances to include
command supervision.
   E4.T1.2.4. CPO Assistance or Administration.
Relates to CPO support for:
     E4.T1.2.4.1. Technical advice and counsel       Authorized    Authorized    Authorized     Not Authorized
that may be provided by the CPO to assist in the
personnel management of employees paid with
NAFs.
     E4.T1.2.4.2. Day-to-day personnel               Authorized    Authorized    Authorized     Authorized
administration of employees paid with NAFs to        when no       when no       when no
include, but not limited to, recruitment, placement, additional    additional    additional
position classification, salary and wage             incremental   incremental   incremental
administration, training, personnel records          APF costs are APF costs are APF costs are
maintenance, employee relations, and personnel       incurred      incurred      incurred
matters.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                   30                           ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                            DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

           Table E4.T1. General Funding Authorizations for NAFI Activities, continued

             Element of Resource                                        APF                                 NAF
                                                     Category         Category          Category
                                                        A                B               C1, 2, 3
   E4.T1.2.5. Family Housing Overseas. Applies
to employees who are authorized housing or a
housing allowance in overseas areas.
     E4.T1.2.5.1. APF Personnel.                 Authorized        Authorized        Authorized     Not Authorized
     E4.T1.2.5.2. NAF Personnel.                 Authorized for    Authorized for    Authorized for Authorized
                                                 APF-              APF               APF
                                                 authorized        authorized        authorized
                                                 positions         positions         positions
   E4.T1.2.6. Personnel Evacuation Expenses.
Includes evacuation payments, evacuation
transportation to and from safe-haven locations,
and per diem and subsistence allowances for
employees ordered to evacuate by the
commanding officer or other DoD authority.
     E4.T1.2.6.1. APF Personnel.                 Authorized        Authorized        Authorized       Not Authorized
     E4.T1.2.6.2. NAF Personnel. NAF             Authorized        Authorized        Authorized       Authorized
employees may not receive evacuation benefits                                                         only when
beyond the amounts and limitations authorized in                                                      APFs are not
the JTR                                                                                               available or
                                                                                                      sufficient
E4.T1.3. TRAVEL OF PERSONNEL
   E4.T1.3.1. PCS. Applies to relocation of APF
and NAF personnel assigned on a full-time
permanent basis to NAFI programs and activities
for:                                                                                                    Not
     E4.T1.3.1.1. APF Personnel.                  Authorized        Authorized        Authorized        Authorized
     E4.T1.3.1.2. NAF Personnel.                  Not authorized Not authorized Not authorized Authorized
                                                  except for        except for        except for
                                                  APF-              APF-              APF-
                                                  authorized        authorized        authorized
                                                  NAF positions NAF positions NAF positions
                                                  or for costs that or for costs that or for costs that
                                                  are a direct      are a direct      are a direct
                                                  result of an      result of an      result of an
                                                  approved          approved          approved
                                                  BRAC action BRAC action BRAC action
  E4.T1.3.2. TDY.                                                                                       Authorized for
     E4.T1.3.2.1. Applies to TDY for personnel                                                          personnel
employed by or assigned or detailed to NAFI                                                             engaged in
programs and activities.                                                                                internal NAFI
       E4.T1.3.2.1.1. APF Personnel.              Authorized        Authorized        Authorized        operations
       E4.T1.3.2.1.2. NAF Personnel.              Authorized        Authorized        Authorized        Authorized
                                                  when travel is when travel is when travel is
                                                  directed by an directed by an directed by an
                                                  authorized        authorized        authorized
                                                  DoD official      DoD official      DoD official
                                                  and relates to and relates to and relates to
                                                  APF business APF business APF business




Change 1, 03/20/08                                     31                               ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                           DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007




Element of Resource                                                    APF                              NAF
                                                      Category       Category        Category
                                                          A              B             C1, 2, 3
  E4.T1.3.3. Use of Government-Owned                Authorized     Authorized     Authorized to Authorized to
Vehicles. Relates to use of Government-owned,                                     assist in the  reimburse
motor pool-controlled passenger vehicles by a                                     performance of APFs for use
NAFI program or activity.                                                         ECECS          of
                                                                                                 Government-
                                                                                                 owned vehicles
                                                                                                 for other than
                                                                                                 ECECS in
                                                                                                 Category C
E4.T1.4. TRANSPORTATION OF THINGS
                                                                                                Not
  E4.T1.4.1. Goods purchased with APFs              Authorized     Authorized     Authorized    Authorized
  E4.T1.4.2. Goods purchased with NAFs                                                          Authorized
                                                                                                when APFs are
     E4.T1.4.2.1. Transoceanic movement of          Authorized.    Authorized     Authorized.   not available.
goods from CONUS sea and aerial ports of                                          Must be used Not authorized
embarkation to first destination OCONUS or bulk                                   for Armed     for Armed
breakdown point. Includes transoceanic                                            Services      Service
movement of goods from CONUS sea and aerial                                       Exchanges per Exchanges per
ports of embarkation to final destination                                         footnote 7    footnote 7
OCONUS for Armed Services Exchanges.

     E4.T1.4.2.2. Transoceanic movement of          Authorized     Authorized     Authorized       Authorized
goods from OCONUS sea and aerial ports of                                                          when APFs are
embarkation to first destination CONUS or bulk                                                     not available
breakdown point.
     E4.T1.4.2.3. Movement of U.S. and foreign      Authorized.    Authorized.    Authorized.      Authorized
goods within foreign areas when commercial          Includes the   Includes the   Includes the     when APFs are
transportation is not available or in contingency   movement of    movement of    movement of      not available
areas.                                              goods to       goods to       goods to
                                                    remote and     remote and     remote and
                                                    isolated       isolated       isolated
                                                    locations.     locations.     locations.
     E4.T1.4.2.4. Movement of U.S. goods            Authorized     Authorized     Authorized         Authorized
between DoD installations because of base                                                            when APFs are
closures or to safeguard goods under emergency                                                       not available
conditions, e.g., threat of hostile force or natural
disaster.
     E4.T1.4.2.5. All other transportation of NAF Not authorized Not authorized Not authorized Authorized
goods.                                               except on       except on       except on
                                                     reimbursable reimbursable reimbursable
                                                     basis. Initial  basis. Initial  basis. Initial
                                                     APF funding     APF funding     APF funding
                                                     permitted only permitted only permitted only
                                                     when NAFs       when NAFs       when NAFs
                                                     shall reimburse shall reimburse shall reimburse
                                                     APFs            APFs            APFs
   E4.T1.4.3. Household Goods. Applies to the
authorized transportation of household goods for
either:
    E4.T1.4.3.1. APF personnel.                     Authorized     Authorized     Authorized       Not Authorized




Change 1, 03/20/08                                      32                           ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                             DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

            Table E4.T1. General Funding Authorizations for NAFI Activities, continued

             Element of Resource                                           APF                             NAF
                                                        Category        Category        Category
                                                             A               B             C1, 2, 3
      E4.T1.4.3.2. NAF personnel.                    Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for Authorized
                                                     APF-authorized APF-authorized APF-authorized
                                                     NAF positions. NAF positions. NAF positions.
                                                     Initial APF     Initial APF     Initial APF
                                                     funding is      funding is      funding is
                                                     permitted for   permitted for   permitted for
                                                     other NAF       other NAF       other NAF
                                                     positions only positions only positions only
                                                     when NAFs       when NAFs       when NAFs
                                                     shall reimburse shall reimburse shall reimburse
                                                     APFs (except at APFs (except at APFs (except at
                                                     BRAC            BRAC            BRAC
                                                     locations that locations that locations that
                                                     are authorized are authorized are authorized
                                                     APFs)           APFs)           APFs)
E4.T1.5. UTILITIES AND RENTS                                                                         Authorized for
                                                                                                     Category C
   E4.T1.5.1. Utilities. Applies to heat, steam,                                                     costs in
water, gas, electricity, air conditioning, and other Authorized      Authorized      Authorized      CONUS
utility services for buildings on military                                           except for golf when APFs
installations authorized to be used for MWR and                                      courses and     are not
NAFI purposes, and other MWR activities for                                          golf course     available, and
members of the Armed Forces in accordance                                            structures per when not
with section 2492 of Reference (t).                                                  footnote 8      precluded by
                                                                                                     footnote 9
   E4.T1.5.2. Rents. Applies to the use and          Not authorized Not authorized Not authorized NAF leases
possession of non-DoD lands, buildings, and          except upon     except upon     except upon     authorized in
other improvements and installed equipment for specific              specific        specific        accordance
a specified period through contract; lease           approval by the approval by the approval by the with Reference
agreement; or other legal instrument when            Head of the     Head of the     Head of the     (bc) and
authority is granted through appropriate             DoD             DoD             DoD             Reference (bg)
channels.                                            Component       Component       Component
                                                     concerned and concerned and concerned and
                                                     in accordance in accordance in accordance
                                                     with DoD        with Reference with Reference
                                                     Instruction     (bg)            (bg)
                                                     4165.71
                                                     (Reference
                                                     (bg))
E4.T1.6. COMMUNICATIONS                              Authorized in Authorized in Authorized in Authorized in
                                                     support of      support of      support of      support of the
   E4.T1.6.1. Electronic Communications.             command         command         command         operational
Applies to electronic communications                 management      management      management      function of the
(telephone, Internet, television, defense switched functions,        functions,      functions,      activity, e.g.,
network (DSN), fax, public address systems, and statistical data statistical data statistical data procurement of
other electronic media) provided to NAFIs.           gathering,      gathering,      gathering,      items for resale
                                                     communi-        communi-        communi-        and collection
                                                     cations with    cations with    cations with    of income for
                                                     other DoD and other DoD and other DoD and merchandise or
                                                     Government      Government      Government      services sold in
                                                     agencies, and agencies, and agencies, and CONUS
                                                     OCONUS.         OCONUS          OCONUS
                                                     Authorized for
                                                     Internet Cafes
                                                     in deployed
                                                     areas



Change 1, 03/20/08                                       33                             ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                                DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

            Table E4.T1. General Funding Authorizations for NAFI Activities, continued

              Element of Resource                                         APF                                  NAF
                                                        Category        Category          Category
                                                            A               B               C1, 2, 3
   E4.T1.6.2. Postal Service, Mail Indicia, and       Authorized      Authorized        Authorized       Authorized for
Postage. Official communications within and                                                              all
between Government agencies, persons, and                                                                correspondence
private commercial agencies not related to the sale                                                      related to the
of goods and services.                                                                                   operation of the
                                                                                                         NAFI
E4.T1.7. EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE                                                           Authorized,
                                                                                         except for
   E4.T1.7.1. Government-Owned Equipment.          Authorized         Authorized         surplus/ excess Authorized
Applies to maintenance, repair, overhaul, or                                             Government
rework of equipment.                                                                     equipment
   E4.T1.7.2. Equipment Acquired with NAFs.        Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for Authorized
Applies to maintenance, repair, overhaul, or       equipment          equipment          equipment
rework of equipment acquired with NAFs.            acquired with acquired with acquired with
                                                   NAFs but           NAFs but           NAFs but
                                                   authorized for authorized for authorized for
                                                   purchase with purchase with purchase with
                                                   APFs where         APFs where         APFs where
                                                   title transfers to title transfers to title transfers to
                                                   the                the                the
                                                   Government         Government         Government
E4.T1.8. PRINTING AND REPRODUCTION. Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for Authorized
Applies to printing and reproduction, e.g., work   all costs except all costs except all costs except
done on printing presses, lithographing machines, those related to those related to those related to
and other duplicating; related binding operations; the sale of        the sale of        the sale of
photography; electronic media; microfilming;       merchandise or merchandise or merchandise or
formats and forms; editing; and graphics.          services and to services and to services and to
                                                   the internal       the internal       the internal
                                                   operation of       operation of       operation of
                                                   NAFIs              NAFIs              NAFIs
E4.T1.9. OTHER SERVICES. Applies to the            Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for
following categories of expenses incurred in the APF positions APF positions APF positions
day-to-day operation of the NAFI.                  and APF-           and APF-           and APF-           Authorized for
                                                   authorized         authorized         authorized         NAF personnel.
  E4.T1.9.1. Education and Training. Pertains to NAF positions. NAF positions. NAF positions. Not authorized
the advancement of job knowledge, development Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for for APF non-
of skills, and improvement of abilities of NAFI    NAF and APF NAF and APF NAF and APF tuition courses
personnel.                                         employees for employees for employees for
                                                   DoD                DoD                DoD
                                                   Component-         Component-         Component-
                                                   approved           approved           approved
                                                   training that is training that is training that is
                                                   not job unique, not job unique, not job unique,
                                                   e.g.               e.g.               e.g.
                                                   management         management         management
                                                   and/or leader and/or leader and/or leader
                                                   development        development        development
                                                   courses, quality courses, quality courses, quality
                                                   training, health training, health training, health
                                                   and safety,        and safety,        and safety,
                                                   sexual             sexual             sexual
                                                   harassment,        harassment,        harassment,
                                                   etc.               etc.               etc.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                         34                              ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                               DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

            Table E4.T1. General Funding Authorizations for NAFI Activities, continued

               Element of Resource                                         APF                           NAF
                                                          Category       Category       Category
                                                             A              B             C1, 2,3
   E4.T1.9.2. Auditing Services. Relates to the        Authorized in Authorized in Authorized in Authorized in
independent examination, review, and evaluation        accordance     accordance     accordance     accordance
of the records, controls, practices, and procedures    with Reference with Reference with Reference with Reference
in the area of financial and operational               (ab)           (ab)           (ab)           (ab)
management of the NAFI by DoD Component
audit organizations or independent public
accountants.
   E4.T1.9.3. Data Automation. Applies to              Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for
automatic data processing system development or        services        services        services        costs related to
operation (personnel, equipment, supplies) needed      required for    required for    required for    internal
for either essential command supervision or            command         command         command         management of
internal operation of the NAFI.                        supervision     supervision     supervision     NAF resources
                                                       and to          and to          and to          of NAFIs
                                                       discharge a     discharge a     discharge a
                                                       commander's commander's commander's
                                                       supervisory     supervisory     supervisory
                                                       responsibility responsibility responsibility
                                                       for             for             for
                                                       management      management      management
                                                       review and      review and      review and
                                                       analysis        analysis        analysis
   E4.T1.9.4. Financial Management Services.           Authorized to Authorized to Authorized to Authorized for
Relates to those services that reflect the             provide         provide          provide         all costs
preparation of APF and NAF budgets, provide            technical       technical        technical       related to NAF
accounting for financial management data,              guidance and guidance and        guidance and accounting
facilitate the preparation of financial reports, and   assistance in   assistance in    assistance in   and analytical
provide for management review and analysis to          preparing       preparing        preparing       functions
ensure proper control over all resources that          budgets,        budgets,         budgets,        required for
support NAFIs.                                         financial and   financial and    financial and the operation
                                                       analytical data analytical data analytical data of NAFIs
                                                       required for    required for     required for
                                                       command         command          command
                                                       supervision.    supervision.     supervision.
                                                       Not authorized Not authorized Not authorized
                                                       for NAF         for NAF          for NAF
                                                       accounting and accounting and accounting and
                                                       analytical      analytical       analytical
                                                       functions       functions        functions
   E4.T1.9.5. Legal Services. Applies to that          Authorized      Authorized       Authorized      Authorized for
service and assistance provided by or through the                                                       NAFI internal
Judge Advocates General or General Counsel.                                                             legal staffing
   E4.T1.9.6. Procurement Office Assistance and
Administration
                                                                                                        Not
     E4.T1.9.6.1. Assistance. Applies to technical Authorized          Authorized       Authorized      Applicable
advice and assistance that may be provided by the
procurement office to assist NAFI management in
procuring goods and services with NAFs.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                         35                             ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                            DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

            Table E4.T1. General Funding Authorizations for NAFI Activities, continued

             Element of Resource                                         APF                               NAF
                                                      Category          Category        Category
                                                          A                 B              C1, 2,3
     E4.T1.9.6.2. Administration. Applies to      Authorized       Authorized       Authorized       Authorized
the functions of procurement (source              when no          when no          when no
development, preparation of procurement           additional       additional       additional
documents, negotiation of prices, contract        incremental      incremental      incremental
administration and audit, and related             APF costs are    APF costs are    APF costs are
procurement functions) being performed by the     incurred         incurred         incurred10
procurement office in the procurement of goods
and services with NAFs.
   E4.T1.9.7. Custodial and Janitorial Service.    Authorized      Authorized       Not Authorized Authorized
Applies to the manpower, supplies, and                                                               when APFs are
equipment provided by the installation engineer                                                      not available or
or public works department, or by contract.                                                          sufficient
   E4.T1.9.8. Other Services. Relates to those     Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for Not authorized
services of a protective or sanitary nature        all costs       all costs        all costs        for Program
normally supplied as a command function. Such associated with associated with associated with Group I.
services include but are not limited to fire       protecting the protecting the protecting the Authorized for
protection, including acquisition and installation health and      health and       health and       other Program
of extinguishers and sprinkler and alarm           safety of       safety of        safety of        Groups only
systems; security protection, including physical participants and participants and participants and when APFs are
security of buildings (e.g., alarm systems and     employees and employees and employees and not available or
security bars)and personnel background             with protecting with protecting with protecting sufficient
investigations in accordance with DoD 5200.2-R NAFI resources NAFI resources NAFI
(Reference (bh)); protection of funds; pest                                         resources11
control; sewage disposal; environmental
compliance and remediation; trash and garbage
removal; snow removal; safety; medical,
veterinary, and sanitary inspections; and rescue
operations.
   E4.T1.9.9. Minor Construction and               Authorized,     Authorized for Not authorized Authorized for
Modernization. As defined in Reference (m).        except  PCS     Child            unless           PCS lodging,
(See Enclosure 5 for facilities listing.)          lodging. PCS Development permitted by             Category B
                                                   lodging         Centers and      footnotes 12     facilities
                                                   authorized      youth activities and 13 or        (except Child
                                                   under footnotes OCONUS.          Enclosure 5.     Development
                                                   12 and 13       Other facilities                  Centers and
                                                                   authorized per                    OCONUS
                                                                   footnotes 12                      youth
                                                                   and 13.                           activities), and
                                                                                                     Category C.
                                                                                                     Not authorized
                                                                                                     per footnotes
                                                                                                     12 and 13 and
                                                                                                     Enclosure 5.
   E4.T1.9.10. Sustainment and Restoration. As         Authorized      Authorized       Authorized Authorized
defined in Reference (ml).                                                           except for golf when APFs are
                                                                                       courses per not available or
                                                                                        footnote 8    sufficient
   E4.T1.9.11. Routine Grounds Maintenance.            Authorized      Authorized       Authorized Authorized
Applies to work required to maintain                                                 except for golf when APFs are
surrounding building grounds.                                                          courses per not available or
                                                                                        footnote 8    sufficient



            Table E4.T1. General Funding Authorizations for NAFI Activities, continued


Change 1, 03/20/08                                       36                            ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                           DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



Element of Resource                                                 APF                             NAF
                                                   Category       Category       Category
                                                       A              B            C1, 2,3
E4.T1.10. AIRCRAFT PETROLEUM, OIL,               Not Authorized Not Authorized Not Authorized Authorized for
AND LUBRICANTS (POL). Applies to POL                                                          MWR flying
(including fuel additives) consumed by aircraft                                               activities only
operated in conjunction with a NAFI activity.
Does not include cost for travel of personnel
(E4.T1.3.) or for transportation of things
(E4.T1.4.).
E4.T1.11. SHIP POL. Applies to POL                Authorized         Authorized      Not Authorized Authorized
consumed by ships and other vessels operated in
conjunction with Military MWR activities. Does
not include cost for travel of personnel
(E4.T1.3.) or for transportation of things
(E4.T1.4.).
E4.T1.12. SUPPLIES. Applies to supply items Authorized               Authorized      Authorized for Authorized
(expendables) that are consumed or lose their     except for         except for      supplies
identity when used, or whose low value does not expendables          expendables     required for
require the same accountability required for      related to the     related to the ECECS
equipment. Included in this group are clothing, sale of              sale of
tentage, organizational tools, administrative and merchandise or merchandise or
housekeeping supplies (other than those in        services           services
paragraph E4.T1.9.8.), petroleum fuels,
lubricants, preservatives, coolants, and oil
derivatives (other than aircraft and ship POL).
E4.T1.13. EQUIPMENT. Includes the                 Authorized         Authorized      Authorized for Authorized
acquisition cost of any item of equipment,        except for         except for      equipment
furniture, or furnishing that does not meet the   equipment          equipment       required for
criteria of an investment cost as defined in      related to sale of related to sale ECECS and
Volume 2A of Reference (k).                       merchandise or of merchandise surplus/excess
                                                  services unless or services        government
                                                  permitted by       unless          equipment and
                                                  footnote 14        permitted by    per footnote 14
                                                                     footnote 14
E4.T1.14. OTHER OPERATING EXPENSES. Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for Authorized
Includes the cost of types of resources not       costs incurred     costs incurred costs incurred
otherwise provided for, e.g., investments and     incident to the incident to the incident to the
loans, grants, subsidies and contributions,       performance of performance of performance of
insurance claims and indemnities, interest and    functions related functions        functions
dividends, and payments instead of taxes, if such to ECECS or as related to          related to
resources are included in operations              specifically       ECECS or as ECECS or as
appropriations.                                   authorized by      specifically    specifically
                                                  statute or DoD authorized by authorized by
                                                  publication        statute or DoD statute or DoD
                                                                     publication     publication




Change 1, 03/20/08                                     37                            ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                              DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

Element of Resource                                                      APF                           NAF
                                                   Category         Category         Category
                                                   A                B                C1, 2,3
E4.T1.15. NON-OPERATING EXPENSES.                  Authorized for Authorized for Authorized for        Authorized for
Relates to the following categories of services or APF              APF              APF               NAF
expenses provided to a NAFI.                       construction and construction     construction      construction
                                                   for NAF          and for NAF      and for NAF       except for
   E4.T1.15.1. Architectural and Engineering       construction,    construction, construction,        inspection and
Services. Applies to professional services that    when no          when no          when no           supervision
include the necessary consultations, preparation additional         additional       additional        services
of preliminary studies, analyses, cost estimates, manpower          manpower         manpower          required for
working drawings, specifications, and interior     authorizations   authorizations authorizations      government
design and decoration, and to the inspection and are required       are required     are required      acceptance of
supervision services required for the                                                                  the facility
construction, alteration, or restoration of real
property facilities.
   E4.T1.15.2. Major Construction and              Authorized,      Authorized for Not authorized       Authorized for
Modernization. As defined in E2. (See              except PCS       Child            unless             PCS lodging,
Enclosure 5 for facilities listing.)               lodging. PCS     Development permitted by            Category B
                                                   lodging          Centers and      footnotes 12       facilities
                                                   authorized under youth activities and 13 or          (except Child
                                                   footnotes 12 and OCONUS.          Enclosure 5        Development
                                                   13.              Other facilities                    Centers, and
                                                                    authorized per                      OCONUS
                                                                    footnotes 12                        youth
                                                                    and 13.                             activities) and
                                                                                                        Category C
                                                                                                        facilities. Not
                                                                                                        authorized per
                                                                                                        footnotes 12
                                                                                                        and 13 and
                                                                                                        Enclosure 5.
   E4.T1.15.3. Purchase of Real Property.           Purchase of real Purchase of       Purchase of real Not authorized
Relates to the acquisition cost of land, buildings, property           real property   property         except for the
and other fixed improvements.                       authorized only authorized only authorized only purchase of
                                                    to the extent      to the extent   to the extent    commercially
                                                    approved by the approved by        approved by the owned
                                                    Congress           the Congress Congress            buildings
                                                                                                        located on
                                                                                                        government
                                                                                                        property
   E4.T1.15.4. Investment Equipment. Relates Authorized                Authorized      Not authorized Authorized
to the acquisition and use of equipment that        except for         except for      except for use
meets the criteria of investment items as defined equipment            equipment       of surplus/
in Volume 2A of Reference (k).                      related to sale of related to sale excess
                                                    merchandise or of merchandise government
                                                    services unless or services        equipment
                                                    permitted by       unless          unless
                                                    footnote 14        permitted by    permitted by
                                                                       footnote 14     footnote 14
E4.T1.16. MERCHANDISE, SERVICE, AND Not authorized Not authorized Not authorized Authorized
EQUIPMENT FOR RESALE OR RENT.                       unless permitted unless            unless
Pertains to merchandise, services, and equipment by footnote 14 permitted by           permitted by
procured by a NAFI for resale or rent to                               footnote 14     footnote 14
authorized persons, or related to the sale of                                          or footnote 15
merchandise or services.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                        38                             ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                               DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

Footnotes:
1
  Military MWR and Armed Services Exchange Category C activities at designated remote and isolated locations are
authorized funding under Category B rules according to References (g) and (l), except for golf course grounds
maintenance.
2
  On an installation designated under force protection condition Charlie or Delta by the Combatant Commander,
Military Service Chief, or equivalent DoD civilian, Military MWR Category C activities, excluding golf courses, golf
course structures, cart storage buildings, maintenance sheds, and pro shops, are authorized APF support for civilian
personnel with installation management and supervisory functions (excluding personnel directly and primarily
involved in resale), utilities and rents, and custodial and janitorial services. Prior to implementation, each Military
Service shall ensure accounting mechanisms are in place to account for and report the support, by element of expense
as APF support to the MWR program. The APF authority is discontinued at the end of the same FY quarter during
which the designated force protection condition is disestablished or downgraded. APF support to Category A and B
activities shall not be diverted for this purpose.
3
   Armed Forces Recreation Center, Europe, is only authorized utilities, sustainment, restoration, and modernization of
real property, and transportation of products made in the United States in accordance with section 2491b of Reference
(t).
4
  Active duty military personnel performing ECECS are authorized in sufficient numbers for Armed Services
Exchange programs to provide a trained cadre to meet wartime and deployment requirements and to perform
managerial functions.
5
     Enlisted personnel may be employed during non-duty hours by NAFIs as part-time NAF-paid employees.
6
  Authorized for Armed Services Exchange programs for funding of civilian personnel in sufficient numbers to
provide a trained cadre to perform ECECS and managerial functions to meet exchange wartime deployment
requirements in support of contingency, humanitarian, and peacekeeping operations. Permanent assignment utilization
and the assignment of additional or collateral duties in lieu of military positions are authorized by paragraph E4.T1.1.
and note 4 to this table. Where NAF civilian positions are utilized, APF support is authorized for NAF expenditures
incurred for compensation and benefits, travel of personnel, transportation of household goods, and education and
training.
7
  APFs shall be used to cover the expenses of transporting Armed Services Exchange supplies and products to
destinations outside CONUS in accordance with section 2643 of Reference (t) and DoD Directive 4500.9E (Reference
(bi))
8
  Not authorized for golf courses or golf course structures other than golf club houses inside the United States except
those designated by the Secretary of Defense as a remote and isolated location in accordance with section 2491a of
Reference (t). Not authorized for cart storage buildings, maintenance sheds, and pro shops inside the United States
even if part of golf club house.
9
  Rates charged shall not include incremental or prorated shares of overhead, maintenance, and repair to utility
systems or capital investments in the installation’s utility infrastructure systems unless otherwise specified by an MOA
or Inter-Service Support Agreement (ISSA).
10
   Authorized for Armed Services Exchanges when existing APF contracts may be used to purchase the item or
services.
11
     Trash and garbage removal services are not authorized for Armed Services Exchange activities in CONUS.
12
   APFs may be used for all community facility construction related to the establishment, activation, or expansion of a
military installation or relocation of facilities for the convenience of the Government; replacement of facilities denied
by country-to-country agreements; restoration of facilities and improvements destroyed by acts of God, fire, or
terrorism; antiterrorism/force protection measures required under Reference (ai); and to correct life safety and
Americans with Disabilities Act (Reference (aj)) and force protection deficiencies. In the case of installation
expansion, a major increase in authorized and assigned personnel strength over a short period of time is necessary
before APF construction can be programmed. Such expansion must be the result of a mission change or influx of new
units or systems. For example, a 25 percent increase in a 2-year time span satisfies these criteria. In contrast,
personnel increases resulting from an evolutionary expansion occurring over several years do not satisfy these criteria.
13
  APFs shall be used for site development costs, archeological and ammunition clearances, environmental assessment
and remediation, water purification, demolition, excessive utility connections, and road services.
14
  Authorized for losses caused by acts of God; losses during wartime deployments and in support of contingency,
humanitarian, and peacekeeping operations; and for equipment required to be in compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act. (Reference (aj)).
15
   APFs are authorized for military clothing and other APF funded items sold in Armed Services Exchanges on a cost-
reimbursable basis.



    Change 1, 03/20/08                                     39                              ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                      DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                       E5. ENCLOSURE 5

                           CONSTRUCTION OF NAFI FACILITIES1


                 Table E5.T1. Program Groups and their Supporting NAFIs

                                                                                    APF/
                     Program Group, Category, and Facility                                    NAF
                                                                                   MILCON
E5.T1.1. PROGRAM GROUP I – MILITARY MWR

       E5.T1.1.1. PROGRAM GROUP I – MILITARY MWR, CATEGORY A
                E5.T1.1.1.1. Administrative Office/Supply Center                     X
                E5.T1.1.1.2. Aquatic Training Facility/Bathhouse for military
                             training, physical fitness, combat training and/or      X
                             therapy
                E5.T1.1.1.3. Auditorium/Multipurpose Theater                         X
                E5.T1.1.1.4. Gymnasium/Fieldhouse/Physical Activities                X
                E5.T1.1.1.5. Library                                                 X
                E5.T1.1.1.6. Playing Courts and Fields (associated with physical     X
                             conditioning)
                E5.T1.1.1.7. Recreation Center/Day Room/Multipurpose                 X
                             Recreational Facility
       E5.T1.1.2. PROGRAM GROUP I – MILITARY MWR, CATEGORY B
                E5.T1.1.2.1. Arts and Crafts/Skill Development                                 X
                E5.T1.1.2.2. Automotive Skill Development Center                               X
                E5.T1.1.2.3. Campgrounds                                                       X
                E5.T1.1.2.4. Outdoor Recreation Pavilion                                       X
                E5.T1.1.2.5. Playing Courts and Fields                                         X
                E5.T1.1.2.6. Recreation Equipment Issue Facility                               X
                E5.T1.1.2.7. Recreation Swimming Pools/Bathhouse                               X
                E5.T1.1.2.8. Youth Centers/Courts/Playing Fields – OCONUS            X
                E5.T1.1.2.9. Youth Centers/Courts/Playing Fields – CONUS                       X
                E5.T1.1.2.10. Bowling Centers (12 lanes or less)                               X
                E5.T1.1.2.11. Child Development Centers                              X
                E5.T1.1.2.12. Marinas without Resale or Private Berthing                       X
                E5.T1.1.2.13. Information, Tickets and Tours Facilities                        X
       E5.T1.1.3. PROGRAM GROUP I – MILITARY MWR, CATEGORY C
                E5.T1.1.3.1. Aero Club                                                         X
                E5.T1.1.3.2. Amateur Radio Facility                                            X
                E5.T1.1.3.3. Armed Forces Recreation Centers                                   X
                             (accommodations/dining and resale facilities)
                E5.T1.1.3.4. Bandstand                                                         X
                E5.T1.1.3.5. Bathhouse                                                         X
                E5.T1.1.3.6. Bowling Centers (more than 12 lanes)                              X
                E5.T1.1.3.7. Car Wash                                                          X
                E5.T1.1.3.8. Golf Course/Facility                                              X
                E5.T1.1.3.9. Marinas/Boathouse                                                 X




Change 1, 03/20/08                                40                           ENCLOSURE 10
                                                                              DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                 Table E5.T1. Program Groups and their Supporting NAFIs, continued

                                                                                               APF/
                         Program Group, Category, and Facility                                                 NAF
                                                                                              MILCON
           E5.T1.1.3. PROGRAM GROUP I – MILITARY MWR CATEGORY C, continued
                       E5.T1.1.3.10. Open Messes/Military Clubs                                                 X
                       E5.T1.1.3.11. Other NAFI Resale Outlets                                                  X
                       E5.T1.1.3.12. Outdoor Theater                                                            X
                       E5.T1.1.3.13. Recreational Lodging                                                       X
                       E5.T1.1.3.14. Recreational Water Parks                                                   X
                       E5.T1.1.3.15. Riding Stable                                                              X
                       E5.T1.1.3.16. Rod and Gun Club                                                           X
                       E5.T1.1.3.17. Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks and Storage Lots                           X
                       E5.T1.1.3.18. Skating Rink (Ice or Roller)                                               X
                       E5.T1.1.3.19. PCS Lodging Facility (in support of official PCS                           X
                                     travel, operated as MWR Category C)
E5.T1.2. PROGRAM GROUP II – ARMED SERVICES EXCHANGES
           E5.T1.2.1. Exchange Logistical, Administrative, Storage and Maintenance                              X2
                      Facilities
           E5.T1.2.2. Exchange Facilities required in areas of military conflict, wartime          X
                      deployments, and in support of contingency, humanitarian, and
                      peacekeeping operations
           E5.T1.2.3. Exchange Facilities required as integral parts of air terminal,              X
                      hospital, housing, or other MILCON projects
           E5.T1.2.4. Exchange operated laundry and dry cleaning plants, bakeries,                 X
                      dairies, or similar facilities in support of a military mission,
                      wartime deployments, and in support of contingency,
                      humanitarian, and peacekeeping operations
           E5.T1.2.5. All Other Exchange Facilities                                                             X
E5.T1.3. PROGRAM GROUP III – CIVILIAN MWR
           E5.T1.3.1. Category C – All Facilities                                                               X
E5.T1.4. PROGRAM GROUP IV – LODGING PROGRAM
           E5.T1.4.1. Category A – TDY Lodging Facility (in support of official TDY                X
           travel)
           E5.T1.4.2. Category A – PCS Lodging Facility (in support of official PCS                             X
           travel)
E5.T1.5. PROGRAM GROUP V – SUPPLEMENTAL MISSION FUNDS
           E5.T1.5.1. Category B – Stars & Stripes Facilities                                                   X
           E5.T1.5.2. Category C – All Facilities                                                               X
E5.T1.6. PROGRAM GROUP VI – SPECIAL PURPOSE CENTRAL FUNDS

          E5.T1.6.1. Category C – All Facilities                                                                X
Footnotes:
1
  Under section 2881 of Reference (t), any project for the acquisition or construction of military family housing
units or military unaccompanied housing units may include the acquisition or construction of community-type
ancillary supporting facilities for the housing units concerned, provided such facilities are not in direct competition
with the Defense Commissary Agency or any NAFI.
2
    APFs shall be used outside the United States.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                       41                              ENCLOSURE 5
                                                               DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                     E6. ENCLOSURE 6

       DOD MWR UTILIZATION SUPPORT AND ACCOUNTABILITY (USA) AND
           UNIFORM FUNDING AND MANAGEMENT (UFM) PRACTICES


E6.1. APPLICABILITY

Appropriations may be made available to Program Group I, Program Group II, and Program
Group V (the “Stars and Stripes” and Service Academy mixed-funded athletic or recreational
extracurricular programs only) after NAFI expenditure using the DoD MWR USA practice, or
before NAFI expenditure using the UFM practice, only if the program is authorized to receive
APF support and only in the amounts the program is authorized to receive.


E6.2. MOA

Military Departments shall establish an MOA outlining the MWR services, by units and/or
functions, to be provided by the NAFI to meet its requirements for base operations APF support.
Under the DoD MWR USA practice, APFs provided shall not exceed the NAFI cost for
providing the services.

    E6.2.1. The MOA shall include the amount and obligation schedule for APFs to be provided,
and shall be signed by the senior APF resource manager, the NAFI fund manager, and the
installation commander.

    E6.2.2. The MOA may be amended, as required, for changes in services to be provided or
for changes in installation base operations total support.

    E6.2.3. Under the DoD MWR USA practice, positions encumbered by APF employees shall
not be converted to a NAF system. Under the UFM practice, positions encumbered by APF
employees may be converted to a NAF system with the consent of the employee provided there
is no break in service for the employee. The conversion of an encumbered position shall not
entitle an employee to severance pay, back pay, or separation pay under sections 5595-5597 of
Reference (am)) and shall not be considered an involuntary separation or other adverse personnel
action. An employee who does not consent to the conversion may not be removed from the
position because of failure to provide such consent. Under both the DoD MWR USA and UFM
practices, if such an APF position becomes vacant, the MOA may be modified to include those
services to be provided by the NAFI. Under the DoD MWR USA practice, a position converted
to NAF or contract shall not be converted back to an APF position. NAF human resource offices
must coordinate the transfer and portability of benefits of APF employees moving to the NAF
employment system.


E6.3. ACCOUNTING AND BUDGETING




Change 1, 03/20/08                            42                        ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

The APF support provided through the DoD MWR USA and UFM practices shall be reported in
budgets, installation accounting records, financial statements, exhibits, and reports submitted to
the Department of Defense and the Congress in accordance with Volumes 2, 4, 6, and 13 of
Reference (k) and this Instruction.

    E6.3.1. Object Class Code 2500 – Other Services shall be used to budget and account for
APFs provided through the UFM and DoD MWR USA practices. Payment shall occur only after
obligation of APFs on DoD Form 2406, “Miscellaneous Obligation Document” (MOD). This
obligation shall be based on the MOA, which is the supporting document for the MOD.

    E6.3.2. The UFM and DoD MWR USA practice shall not be used to extend the availability
of APFs. An MWR USA MOD shall include delivery schedules that ensure services will be
provided not later than the expiration date of funds. APFs made available through these
practices shall be considered to be NAFs for all purposes and shall remain available until
expended.

    E6.3.3. The MWR activity shall prepare a billing for services using Standard Form 1034,
“Public Voucher for Purchases and Services Other Than Personal,” itemized by function to
correspond to the MOA.

    E6.3.4. APF resources received through the DoD MWR USA and UFM practices shall be
recorded on a transaction basis and in sufficient detail in the NAF accounting records to identify
support for each activity broken down by the cost expense captions in Enclosure 6. The
statement of income and expense shall explain any differences due to foreign currency
fluctuation in accordance with Volume 2A of Reference (k).

    E6.3.5. Fixed assets acquired with MWR USA or UFM resources shall be expensed at the
time of purchase and recorded in the NAFI fixed asset records for inventory and control purposes
at zero acquisition value. These fixed assets are NAFI assets; proceeds from the disposition of
these assets revert to the NAFI.

    E6.3.6. APF disbursing offices shall process payments to the NAFI by electronic funds
transfer when feasible.


E6.4. AUDITS

During the NAFI audits, the auditors shall ascertain that services provided to the APFs were in
accordance with the MOA.




Change 1, 03/20/08                              43                        ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                   DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                        E7. ENCLOSURE 7

                                   COST EXPENSE CAPTIONS


E7.1. APF CAPTIONS

The following cost expense captions identify expenses reported on Schedule A – APF and NAF
Expense Summary. (See Attachment 4 to Enclosure 8.)

       E7.1.1. Military Personnel

               E7.1.1.1. Includes the cost of the services of active duty forces military personnel
computed according to policy in Volume 7A of Reference (k). Also includes the cost of
personnel assigned or used on a permanent, temporary, intermittent, or collateral duty basis.
Does not include the cost of any person with less than 25 percent part-time or collateral duties.
Costs shall be accrued at the standard rates in proportion to time used in performing duties
associated with the NAFI.

                E7.1.1.2. Does not include personnel costs that are captured or part of a
subsidiary costing system to the extent such costs are reported under another expense element of
this report. (For example, if maintenance and repair or sustainment, modernization, and
restoration costs include a proper allocation of labor charges, such labor charges shall not be
reported under personnel expenses.)

       E7.1.2. Civilian Personnel (Services and Benefits)

                E7.1.2.1. Includes the cost of the services of civilian personnel paid from APFs.
Also includes the cost of personnel compensation and benefits, including employer costs for
Civil Service Retirement System, Federal Employees Retirement System, Thrift Savings Plan,
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance, and Federal Employees Group Health Insurance. Also
includes the cost of personnel assigned or used on a permanent, temporary, intermittent, or
collateral duty basis. Does not include the cost of any person with less than 25 percent part-time
or collateral duties. Costs shall be accrued in proportion to time used to perform duties
associated with the NAFI.

               E7.1.2.2. Does not include personnel costs that are captured as part of a
subsidiary costing system to the extent such costs are reported under another expense element of
this report.

       E7.1.3. Utilities

                 E7.1.3.1. Includes the cost of heat, light, power, water, gas, electricity, steam, and
other utility services, except transportation and communication services. Utility costs shall be
reported for all buildings and facilities used exclusively or predominantly for NAFI activities.
For buildings or facilities where a portion of the space is dedicated to predominantly NAFI



Change 1, 03/20/08                                44                         ENCLOSURE 7
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

purposes and the remainder is used predominantly for non-NAFI functions, utility costs shall be
prorated. Rates charged shall not include incremental or prorated shares of overhead,
maintenance, and repair to utility systems, or capital investments in the installation’s utility
infrastructure systems unless otherwise specified by an MOA or ISSA.

                E7.1.3.2. When metering devices are not available to measure utility costs for a
given facility, an appropriate analytical prorate formula may be used. Utilities may be prorated
on the basis of relative square footage if such a method does not result in a gross distortion.
Utility costs shall not be reported for a facility that is used predominantly for non-NAFI purposes
and only incidentally for NAFI purposes.

        E7.1.4. Rents. Includes rental of equipment (except transportation equipment) and rental
of real property. When NAFI activities occupy portions of blocks of space rented by the
Government, rental charges shall be allocated to NAFI activities. Relative square footage may
be used as the basis for allocation if this does not produce a gross distortion of the true costs.

        E7.1.5. Communications. Include charges for the transmission of messages from place
to place, postal charges, and electronic communications (telephone and telephone installation
charges, Internet, television, DSN, fax, public address systems, and other electronic media).
Costs shall include a fair and reasonable charge for the use of telephone instruments.

       E7.1.6. Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization (SRM) (Including Minor
Construction) and Maintenance and Repair of APF Equipment

                E7.1.6.1. Includes SRM of facilities and of real property supplied through
commercial contracts. Includes installation service functions such as post engineer or base civil
engineer, and maintenance and repair of APF equipment. Also includes the erection, addition,
expansion, extension, alteration, conversion, or replacement of an existing facility or the
relocation of a facility from one place to another, providing that the cost of such construction
does not exceed the limits for minor construction as outlined in Volume 2B of Reference (k).

                E7.1.6.2. When SRM funded from APFs is performed for NAFI activities, costs
shall be reported to include direct labor and materials. Overhead allocation for general and
administrative expenses, supplies and miscellaneous materials, and equipment and equipment
usage charges shall be included when subsidiary costing systems are available to allocate such
overhead items of SRM jobs, or where such overhead allocation is necessary to prevent a gross
underestimate of SRM costs. SRM costs allocated on the basis of job costing systems, using
fixed charges or unit costs for specific categories of maintenance, may be used if such systems
provide a reasonable aggregate estimate of SRM costs.

               E7.1.6.3. SRM costs shall be allocated to NAFI activities on the basis of some
form of job order system. SRM of a shared facility not directly identifiable with either the NAFI
or non-NAFI portion shall be allocated on a reasonable basis such as relative square footage.
Minor SRM not separately identifiable as an SRM expense need not be allocated to this expense
element as long as such costs are included under other expense elements, such as personnel or
supplies.



Change 1, 03/20/08                              45                        ENCLOSURE 7
                                                                   DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

        E7.1.7. Supplies and Equipment. Includes the cost of supplies, equipment, and materials
that are ordinarily consumed or expended within 2 years after they are put into use or are used to
form a minor part of fixed property (such as repair parts). Includes APF information technology
software that is not capitalized. Does not include supplies reflected in the SRM element of a
resource.

       E7.1.8. Contractual Services. Includes the cost of services that are provided indirectly
through contracts or MOAs, such as custodial contracts or payroll service contracts. Also
includes the APFs provided to a NAFI for the costs of services provided by a NAFI under UFM
and DoD MWR USA practices or under other MOAs.

        E7.1.9. Travel of Personnel. Includes travel and transportation of persons when the
primary purpose of such travel and transportation is the conduct of NAFI business. Includes
commercial transportation fares, rental of passenger-carrying vehicles, subsistence for travelers
such as per diem allowances, incidental travel expenses such as baggage transfer and telephone
expenses, mileage allowances and tolls, and charges for use of Government-owned passenger-
carrying vehicles. For the latter, the expenses may be computed using a standard cost per mile
when actual expenses are not readily identifiable. Also includes TDY travel of personnel
employed by, assigned to, or detailed to NAFI programs; travel of participants in NAFI
programs; and PCS travel for civilians relocated to NAFI programs and activities. (The expense
shall be charged to the activity where the civilian is relocated.)

       E7.1.10. Transportation of Things

               E7.1.10.1. Includes expenses for the transportation of things, whether incurred
through contract or use of Government resources. Also includes contractual charges by common
and contract carrier, rental of trucks and other transportation equipment, use of non-passenger
vehicles from base motor pools, and transportation charges for Government airlift, sealift, and
other transportation or logistic support.

                E7.1.10.2. Includes transportation of household goods related to PCS travel for
civilians relocated (on a full-time basis) to NAFI programs and activities. (The expense shall be
charged to the activity where the civilian is relocated.) Transportation costs of using
Government vehicles may be computed using a standard cost per mile or other appropriate
method as long as it fairly estimates the cost. Transportation by airlift or sealift shall be charged
by the costing method that states a fair user charge covering both direct and overhead costs, as
prescribed by Volume 11A of Reference (k).

        E7.1.11. Construction of Facilities. Includes costs associated with construction and
acquisition of land funded by MILCON appropriations meeting criteria for major construction as
outlined in Volume 2B of Reference (k). Included are design modification, contract
administration, inspection, supervision of construction, and other related costs.

       E7.1.12. Equipment (Investment Type). Includes equipment having a useful life
expectancy of more than 2 years and an acquisition cost as prescribed by Volume 2A of (j).




Change 1, 03/20/08                               46                         ENCLOSURE 7
                                                                  DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

E7.2. NAF CAPTIONS

The various expense captions shall include aggregations of accounts from current NAF general
ledger systems that most appropriately correspond to the APF captions.

        E7.2.1. Reimbursed Common Support. Includes those expenses provided by a different
Program Group and reimbursed by the benefiting Program Group as identified in paragraph
6.1.1.1. Does not include premiums or assessments paid to a Program Group VI – Special
Purpose Central Fund.

        E7.2.2. NAF Depreciation. Includes depreciation expense on NAFI capitalized tangible
fixed assets, both NAFI-owned fixed assets and fixed assets to which title has been transferred to
the Government.

        E7.2.3. Facilities and Improvements (Land and Structures). Includes capitalized costs
for tangible fixed assets, as defined in paragraph E2.24., for land, buildings, and other structures;
additions to buildings; nonstructural improvements; and fixed equipment. Also includes NAF
capitalized minor construction, construction in progress, capitalized sustainment, restoration,
modernization, and capital leases for buildings.

        E7.2.4. Equipment (Investment Type). Includes all other capitalized tangible fixed
assets not included in paragraph E7.2.3.




Change 1, 03/20/08                               47                         ENCLOSURE 7
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                      E8. ENCLOSURE 8

                                   FINANCIAL REPORTING


E8.1. CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL REPORT

    E.8.1.1. The consolidated financial report submitted for each Program Group shall include
an executive overview, notes to accompany the financial statements, and the following
preformatted reports.

       E8.1.1.1. Balance Sheet. (See Attachment 1.)

       E8.1.1.2. Reconciliation of Net Worth. (See Attachment 2.)

       E8.1.1.3. Statement of Income and Expense. (See Attachment 3.)

       E8.1.1.4. Schedule A – APF and NAF Expense Summary. (See Attachment 4.)

       E8.1.1.5. Statement of Cash Flows. (See Attachment 5.)

       E8.1.1.6. NAFs Available/Projected Usage. (See Attachment 6.)

    E8.1.2. The reports shall be provided in Microsoft Word and Excel on CD ROM or
electronically. Modification of report formats, such as adding or deleting programs, activities, or
line items is not permitted.


E8.2. ADDITIONAL REPORTS

The following additional reports shall be submitted for Program Group I – Military MWR
Programs, Program Group II – Armed Services Exchange Programs, Program Group IV –
Lodging Programs, and Program Group V – Supplemental Mission Funds.

       E8.2.1. Program Group I – Military MWR Programs

               E8.2.1.1. Statement of Income and Expense for each funding category and for
each activity defined in Reference (g).

               E8.2.1.2. Schedule A – APF and NAF Expense Summary for each funding
category and for each activity defined in Reference (g).

               E8.2.1.3. DoD MWR USA and UFM Practices Reports for each funding category
and for each activity within funding categories. (See Attachment 7.)




Change 1, 03/20/08                              48                        ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

       E8.2.2. Program Group II – Armed Services Exchange Programs

               E8.2.2.1. DoD MWR USA and UFM Practices Reports.

               E8.2.2.2. Annual S&P rating.

               E8.2.2.3. Annual Exchange Sales, Profits, and Dividends Report with preliminary
figures by February 15 of each year, and a final Exchange Sales, Profits, and Dividends Report
with the consolidated financial report. (See Attachment 8.)

             E8.2.2.4. Monthly Sales Report not later than the end of the succeeding month.
(See Attachment 9.)

       E8.2.3. Program Group IV – Lodging Programs

               E8.2.3.1. Statement of Income and Expense for TDY lodging and PCS lodging
separately.

              E8.2.3.2. Schedule A – APF and NAF Expense Summary for TDY lodging and
PCS lodging separately. Total APF support of the lodging mission and support related to the
NAFI shall be reported.

              E8.2.3.3. Military treatment facility lodging report, as a separate Program Group
IV – Lodging Program.

        E8.2.4. Program Group V – Supplemental Mission Funds. DoD MWR USA and UFM
Practices Reports for the “Stars and Stripes” and the Service Academy mixed-funded athletic or
recreational extracurricular programs.


E8.3. REPORT COMPLETION

        E8.3.1. Executive Overview. The annual report shall include a narrative for each
Program Group to ensure clarity in the data reported and to highlight significant operations and
trends. The narrative shall meet standards of full disclosure.

        E8.3.2. Notes to Accompany the Financial Statements. Each Program Group shall
provide notes to the financial statements in accordance with the managerial accounting practices
at paragraph 6.4.2.

               E8.3.2.1. Within each Program Group, transactions between NAFIs and activities
(such as dividend and profit distributions, grant distributions, contra-receivables and payables)
shall be eliminated. Footnotes to the financial statements shall disclose the nature and amount of
material transactions between Program Groups.




Change 1, 03/20/08                             49                         ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

               E8.3.2.2. A description of the methodology used to prorate common support
expenses shall be included, along with the number of NAFIs operating as of the last day of the
FY for each of the Program Groups. The DoD Components shall establish procedures that
ensure that prorated common support functions can be readily identified.

            E8.3.2.3. The Balance Sheet, Statement of Income and Expense, and Schedule A
– APF and NAF Expense Summary Reports shall be footnoted to disclose the amount of DoD
MWR USA support, UFM support, or other APF support included in the NAFI financial
statements.

               E8.3.2.4. The net revenue (after cash payout) and net income of slot machines
and other recreation machines that return money or tokens redeemable for money, authorized by
Reference (g), shall be identified by footnote by activity on all applicable reports.

               E8.3.2.5. Footnotes shall disclose appropriate post-retirement benefit amounts
required by Reference (j) specifically identifying the funded status, amortization period of
unfunded liabilities, prepaid/accrued post-retirement costs recognized in balance sheet, and other
notes as appropriate.

       E8.3.3. Statement of Income and Expense (See Attachment 3.)

               E8.3.3.1. To avoid double counting, the NAF income and expense shall be
reported net of the APF support received through the DoD MWR USA and UFM practices or
other APF MOA.

               E8.3.3.2. NAF income and expense for common support functions shall be
allocated to and reported by the benefiting categories (Category A, B, and C). Allocation
procedures shall be the same as those used to prepare Schedule A – APF and NAF Expense
Summary. Such allocation shall not be made to a single category. Allocated or prorated
management overhead shall not be reported below the category level: allocation shall not be
made to individual MWR activities (such as physical fitness, sports or athletics, or golf).

       E8.3.4. Schedule A – APF and NAF Expense Summary (See Attachment 4.)

              E8.3.4.1. APF resources executed in support of the NAFI mission shall be
reported as APF support. The format shall be used to show applicable appropriations (such as
operation and maintenance (O&M); procurement; MILCON; research, development, test, and
evaluation (RDT&E); and industrial funds).

                E8.3.4.2. The amounts of APF support reported shall correspond to the prior year
data reported on the OP-34 Exhibit, “APF Fund Support for Morale, Welfare, and Recreation
(MWR) Activities,” contained in the justification material for the President’s budget. MILCON
shall be reported as a memo entry.




Change 1, 03/20/08                              50                        ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                  DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

               E8.3.4.3. NAF depreciation represents write-off of capital purchases as they are
used; therefore, depreciation expense shall not be included in the “total costs” line after capital
expenditures are added.

               E8.3.4.4. The breakdown of NAF expenditures must equal the operating
expenses, other expenses, and extraordinary expense line items reported on the Statement of
Income and Expense. Only the NAF cost of goods sold is excluded from Schedule A. NAF
capital expenditures shall be reported in the year that funds are expended and assets are recorded
in the accounting records (including construction in progress and capital leases).

                E8.3.4.5. NAF civilian personnel (salaries, wages, services, and benefits)
reported shall equal the totals for NAF employee salaries and benefits reported on the NAFI
Employer Compensation and Benefit Programs Report in DoD Instruction 1330.20 (Reference
(bj)).

              E8.3.4.6. The resources received to support the NAFI mission under the DoD
MWR USA practice, UFM practice, or other APF MOA shall be reported only as APF
Contractual Services support on Schedule A. NAF expenses shall not include those expenses for
which APFs were received. (NAF expenses shall be reported net of APF support.)

              E8.3.4.7. Particular care must be taken in reporting APF support to Program
Group V – Supplemental Mission Funds to ensure reporting of only those costs directly related
to the supplemental function of the NAFI (such as the dependents school fund) and not to the
mission the NAFI supports (such as education).

               E8.3.4.8. To avoid duplicate reporting, when one appropriation reimburses
another appropriation (including industrial and RDT&E funds), data shall be provided under the
appropriation that provides initial financing.

               E8.3.4.9. The APF Amounts column shall show only the support that is non-
reimbursable from NAFs.

               E8.3.4.10. Military personnel services (at rates prescribed by Volume 7A of
Reference (k)), O&M, RDT&E, and industrial funds resources shall be reported in the FY that
accrued costs are incurred.

       E8.3.5. Statement of Cash Flows. (See Attachment 5.). This statement summarizes
sources of cash generated during the year and the application of that cash.

               8.3.5.1. Cash flows from operating activities include the cash generated from net
income as well as non-cash expenses and the conversion of current assets and liabilities into
operating cash. Included are reductions in the amount of cash invested in current assets and the
increase of current liabilities. Increases in the amount of cash invested in current assets and
decreases in current liabilities are shown as negative increases to cash.




Change 1, 03/20/08                               51                         ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

               8.3.5.2. Cash flows from investing activities include the reductions to cash due to
purchase of fixed assets and proceeds from the sale of fixed assets.

               8.3.5.3. Cash flows from financing activities include cash gained from borrowing
and capital grants, net proceeds from other long-term liabilities, and cash paid out as dividends.

              8.3.5.4. The Cash and Cash Equivalents at the End of the Year (prior year) shall
be the Cash and Cash Equivalents at the Beginning of the Year (current year).

        E8.3.6. NAFs Available/Projected Usage. (See Attachment 6.) Data shall include the
total cash within the DoD Component for the applicable Program Group at the end of the FY,
and identification of the purposes for which these funds are retained. Any funds available that
do not have a projected usage or a validated commitment are considered excess funds.
Commitments in excess of funds available are to be funded through future earnings or loans.

       E8.3.7. DoD MWR USA and UFM Practices Reports (See Attachment 7.)

           E8.3.7.1. This report shall include APF support provided through the DoD MWR
USA and UFM practices.

              E8.3.7.2. The amounts reported shall correspond to the USA and UFM practices
amounts reported as Contractual Services.

              E8.3.7.3. DoD MWR USA and UFM resources received for common support and
management overhead costs shall be prorated to and reported by the benefiting categories. The
method of prorating costs and the amounts reported for each category shall be identical to the
OP-34 Budget Exhibit and Schedule A – APF and NAF Expense Summary.

       E8.3.8. Exchange Sales, Profits, and Dividends Report. (See Attachment 8.) Data shall
include the Armed Services Exchange direct sales, profits, and dividends based on those profits.

        E8.3.9. Exchange Monthly Sales Report. (See Attachment 9.) Data shall include total
direct sales and same store sales for the current month and year-to-date for the current and prior
FYs.

Attachments – 9
  E8.A1. Balance Sheet
  E8.A2. Reconciliation of Net Worth
  E8.A3. Statement of Income and Expense
  E8.A4. Schedule A – APF and NAF Expense Summary
  E8.A5. Statement of Cash Flows
  E8.A6. NAFs Available/Projected Usage
  E8.A7. Resources Received Under the DoD MWR USA and UFM Practices
  E8.A8. Exchange Sales, Profits, and Dividends Report
  E8.A9. Exchange Monthly Sales Report




Change 1, 03/20/08                              52                         ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                     E8.A1. ATTACHMENT 1 TO ENCLOSURE 8

                                        BALANCE SHEET


                        MILITARY SERVICE: ____________________
                        PROGRAM GROUP: ____________________
                        AS OF: _______________________________
                                    ($ in thousands)
                     ASSETS
                      Current Assets                                   $0
                       Cash/Investments                                 0
                       Receivables                                      0
                       Inventories                                      0
                       Other Current Assets                             0
                      Total Current Assets                             $0
                      Non-current Assets
                        NAFI Owned Fixed Assets                        $0
                        Less: Accumulated Depreciation                  0
                          Net NAFI Owned Fixed Assets                  $0
                          Government Titled Fixed Assets               $0
                        Less: Accumulated Depreciation                  0
                          Net Government Titled Fixed Assets           $0
                          Other                                        $0
                      Total Non-current Assets                         $0
                     Total Assets


                     LIABILITIES and NET WORTH
                      Current Liabilities
                       Accounts Payable                                $0
                       Other Current Liabilities                        0
                      Total Current Liabilities                        $0
                      Long Term Liabilities
                       Loans Payable                                    $0
                       Other                                             0
                      Total Long Term Liabilities              _________$0
                      Total Liabilities                        _________$0
                      Net Worth                                         $0
                     Total Liabilities and Net Worth                   $0




Change 1, 03/20/08                                53
                                                        ATTACHMENT 1 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                               DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                     E8.A2. ATTACHMENT 2 TO ENCLOSURE 8

                        RECONCILIATION OF NET WORTH


                       MILITARY SERVICE: _____________________
                       PROGRAM GROUP:         _____________________
                       AS OF:                 _____________________
                                            ($ in thousands)
                      Net Worth, Beginning:                        $0
                      Additions to Net Worth:
                       Net Income                                  $0
                       Grants Received                             0
                       Other Increases (specify)                    0
                         Total Additions                           $0
                      Reductions to Net Worth:
                       Net Loss                                    $0
                       Grants Disbursed                             0
                       Other Decreases (specify)                    0
                         Total Reductions                          $0
                      Net Addition/Reduction to Net Worth          $0
                      Net Worth, Ending                            $0




Change 1, 03/20/08                           54
                                                         ATTACHMENT 2 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                    DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                       E8.A3. ATTACHMENT 3 TO ENCLOSURE 8

                        STATEMENT OF INCOME AND EXPENSE


                        MILITARY SERVICE:              _____________________
                        PROGRAM GROUP:                 _____________________
                        CATEGORY:                      _____________________
                        FOR THE YEAR ENDING: _____________________
                                                  Current Year       Prior Year
                                                         Percent           Percent
                                                  Amount of Revenue Amount of Revenue
             Sales
             Cost of Goods Sold
              Gross Margin
             Other Operating Income
              Participation Fees and Charges
              Dues and Assessments
              Concessionaire Payments
              Other
                 Total Other Operating Income
              GROSS OPERATING INCOME
             Operating Expenses (Schedule A)
              OPERATING MARGIN
             Other Income
              Dividends
              Grants
              Other
                 Total Non-Operating Income
             Other Expense (Schedule A)
              NET INCOME BEFORE
              EXTRAORDINARY ITEMS
             Extraordinary Income
             Extraordinary Expense (Schedule A)
              NET INCOME




Change 1, 03/20/08                                55
                                                             ATTACHMENT 3 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                           DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                           E8.A4. ATTACHMENT 4 TO ENCLOSURE 8

                    SCHEDULE A – APF AND NAF EXPENSE SUMMARY


                        MILITARY SERVICE:                     _____________________
                        PROGRAM GROUP:                        _____________________
                        FOR THE YEAR ENDING:                  _____________________
                                           ($ in thousands)
                                                              Category A Category B Category C TOTAL
   Cost Expense Captions                                      APF NAF APF NAF APF NAF APF NAF
   Military Personnel                                           $0   n/a    $0   n/a   $0    n/a   $0    n/a
   Civilian Personnel                                            0     0     0     0    0      0    0      0
    (Salaries and Wages)
   Civilian Personnel                                            0    0      0    0     0     0     0     0
    (Services and Benefits)
   Utilities                                                     0    0      0    0     0     0     0     0
   Rents                                                         0    0      0    0     0     0     0     0
   Communications                                                0    0      0    0     0     0     0     0
   Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization                   0    0      0    0     0     0     0     0
    (including APF minor construction)
   Supplies and Equipment                                        0    0      0    0      0    0      0    0
   Contractual Services                                          0    0      0    0      0    0      0    0
   Travel of Personnel                                           0    0      0    0      0    0      0    0
   Transportation of Things                                      0    0      0    0      0    0      0    0
   Reimbursed Common Support                                   n/a    0    n/a    0    n/a    0    n/a    0
   NAF Depreciation                                            n/a    0    n/a    0    n/a    0    n/a    0
   All Other Expenses                                            0    0      0    0      0    0      0    0
   TOTAL EXPENSE                                               $0    $0    $0    $0    $0    $0    $0    $0
   Capital Expenditure Captions
   Facilities and Improvements (Land and Structures)
    APF (MILCON)                                               $0    n/a   $0    n/a   $0    n/a   $0    n/a
    NAF                                                        n/a     0   n/a     0   n/a     0   n/a     0
   Equipment (investment type)                                   0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0
   TOTAL COSTS (less depreciation)                             $0    $0    $0    $0    $0    $0    $0    $0




Change 1, 03/20/08                                     56
                                                                  ATTACHMENT 4 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                          DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                            E8.A5. ATTACHMENT 5 TO ENCLOSURE 8

                                   STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS


                            MILITARY SERVICE:                 _____________________
                            PROGRAM GROUP:                    _____________________
                            FOR THE PERIOD ENDING: _____________________
                                                                                 Current Year   Prior Year
   Operating Activities: Net Income                                                    $0              $0
   Adjustments to Reconcile Net Income to Net Cash Provided by Operating
   Activities:
     Depreciation and Amortization                                                     $0              $0
     Loss on Disposal of Fixed Assets                                                  0               0
     Changes in Assets and Liabilities
      Decrease (Increase) in Accounts Receivable                                       0               0
      Decrease (Increase) in Inventories                                               0               0
      Decrease (Increase) in Prepaid Expenses                                          0               0
      Increase (Decrease) in Accounts Payable                                          0               0
      Increase (Decrease) in Unearned Income                                           0               0
      Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities                                 0               0
      Other (specify)                                                           ______0         ______0
        Total Adjustments                                                              $0              $0
   Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities                                 $0              $0
   Investing Activities:
     (Purchase of Fixed Assets)                                                       $(0)           $(0)
     Proceeds from the Sale of Fixed Assets                                            0               0
     Other (Specify)                                                            ______0         ______0
   Net Cash Used in Investing Activities                                               $0              $0
   Financing Activities:
     Net Borrowing (Specify)                                                           $0              $0
     (Payment of Dividends)                                                            (0)             (0)
     Capital Grants                                                                    0               0
     Net Proceeds from (Payments on) Other Long-Term Liabilities                       0               0
     Other (Specify)                                                            ______0         ______0

   Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Financing Activities                                 $0              $0
   Net Decrease/Increase in Cash and Cash Equivalents                                   0              0
   Cash and Cash Equivalents at Beginning of Year                                       0              0
   Cash and Cash Equivalents at End of Year                                     ______$0        ______$0



Change 1, 03/20/08                                       57
                                                                   ATTACHMENT 5 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                              DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                              E8.A6. ATTACHMENT 6 TO ENCLOSURE 8

                                NAFs AVAILABLE/PROJECTED USAGE

                                MILITARY SERVICE: _____________________
                                PROGRAM GROUP:             _____________________
                                AS OF:                     _____________________
                                                                                    Amount of Funds Invested
                                                                                        As of Close of
                                                                                    Current              Prior
                                                                                     Year                Year
FUNDS AVAILABLE
Operating Cash Invested in Central Banking Program                                              $0               $0
Other Cash Resources/Local Balances:
  Local Bank Accounts                                                                            0                0
  Cash on Hand in Change Funds, Petty                                                            0                0
   Cash Funds, and Conversion Funds
Other Investments (Specify)                                                                      0                0
Fixed Asset Sinking Funds                                                                        0                0
Employee Benefit Sinking Funds1                                                                  0                0
Net Income Before Depreciation for Next FY2                                                      0                0
Total Funds Available                                                                           $0               $0

VALIDATED COMMITMENTS
Cash for Continuing Operations (Compensating                                                    $0               $0
Bank Balances, Operations, Petty Cash, Change Funds,
  Accounts Payable, Other Current Liabilities, etc.)                                             0                0
Employee Benefits (Specify)1                                                                     0                0
Reduction in Long-Term Debt                                                                      0                0
Capital Expenditures for Next FY2                                                                0                0
Dividends to be Paid (Exchanges Only)                                                            0                0
Total Projected Usage                                                                           $0               $0
Excess (Shortfall) of Funds                                                                     $0               $0
_____________
1
  Includes monies to be paid for severance; FICA; medical, dental, and life insurance, plus disability (if not included
in retirement); unemployment compensation; bonuses or incentive awards; moving expenses; and for time not
worked due to sickness, death in family, annual leave, holidays, Reserve Component drills, jury duty, etc.
2
 Net Income Before Depreciation for Next FY and Capital Expenditures for Next FY shown under the prior year
shall be equal to actual Net Income Before Depreciation and actual Capital Expenditures for the current year.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                        58
                                                                      ATTACHMENT 6 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                           DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                              E8.A7. ATTACHMENT 7 TO ENCLOSURE 8

                           DoD MWR USA AND UFM PRACTICES REPORT


                              MILITARY SERVICE:               _____________________
                              PROGRAM GROUP:                  _____________________
                                            1
                              CATEGORY:                       _____________________
                              FOR THE PERIOD ENDING: _____________________
COST EXPENSE CAPTIONS2                                                                 SOURCE OF APF
                                                                                       USA/UFM
                                                                                       RESOURCES3
                                                                                       ____ ____ ____ ____
                                                                                       (Identify
                                                                                       Appropriation)4

Civilian Personnel
  (Salaries and Wages)
Civilian Personnel
  (Services and Benefits)
Utilities
Rents
Communications
Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization
  (including Minor Construction)
Supplies and Equipment
Contractual Services
Travel of Personnel
Transportation of Things
All Other Expense
      TOTAL EXPENSES

CAPITAL EXPENDITURE CAPTIONS
Construction of Facilities
Equipment (Investment-Type)
    TOTAL CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
    TOTAL COSTS
_____________
1
  Show level of reporting (i.e., Total Program, Category A, Category B, Category C).
2
    Cost Expense Caption Definitions are found in Enclosure 6.
3
  Include all obligations of APFs provided for support of the program through the MWR utilization, USA, and UFM
practices. (Do not include APF obligations reimbursed by NAFs.)
4
 Show applicable appropriation captions (such as O&M, O&M Reserve, Procurement, RDT&E, and Defense
Working Capital Fund).




Change 1, 03/20/08                                       59
                                                                   ATTACHMENT 7 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                       DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007




                    DoD MWR USA AND UFM PRACTICES SUPPORT
            (IN DOLLARS AND PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL APF FUND SUPPORT)

            MILITARY SERVICE:                             _____________________
            PROGRAM GROUP:                                _____________________
                         1
            CATEGORY                                      _____________________
            FOR THE PERIOD ENDING:                        _____________________
                                                                      Total
                                                SOURCE APPROPRIATIONS MWR                    Total
CATEGORY A – MISSION SUSTAINING                 (Specify)             USA/UFM                Operating
PROGRAMS                                                              Support                Support
                                                ($000)1 /%2    ($000)1 /%2    ($000)1 /%2    ($000)3 /%4
A1. Armed Forces Professional Entertainment
Overseas
A2. Free Admission Motion Pictures
A3. Physical Fitness and Aquatic Training
A4. Library Programs and Information Services
(Recreation)
A5. On-Installation Parks and Picnic Areas
A6. Basic Social Recreation (Center) Programs
A7. Shipboard, Company, and/or Unit Level
Programs
A8. Sports and Athletics (Self-Directed, Unit
Level, Intramural)
A9. Single Service Member Program
Common Support
TOTAL CATEGORY A
_______________________
1
  Show dollars in thousands; show source of appropriations for DoD MWR USA and UFM practices.
2
  Show percentage of total APF operating support that is provided through DoD MWR USA and UFM practices, by
appropriation and for total.
3
  Show total APF operating support per Schedule A.
4
  Show MWR USA and UFM support as percentage of total APF operating support.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                  60
                                                               ATTACHMENT 7 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                         DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



                                                                               Total
                                                                               MWR            Total
CATEGORY B – BASIC COMMUNITY                       SOURCE APPROPRIATIONS       USA/UFM        Operating
SUPPORT PROGRAMS                                   (Specify)                   Support        Support
                                                   ($000)1 /%2   ($000)1 /%2   ($000)1 /%2   ($000)3 /%4
B1.1. Child Development Program
B1.2. Youth Program
B2.1. Cable and/or Community Television
B2.2. Recreation Information, Tickets, and Tours
Services
B2.3. Recreational Swimming
B3.1. Directed Outdoor Recreation
B3.2. Outdoor Recreation Equipment Checkout
B3.3. Boating without Resale or Private Berthing
B3.4. Camping (Primitive and/or Tents)
B3.5. Riding Stables (Government-owned or -
leased)
B4.1. Amateur Radio (Military Affiliate Radio
System (MARS))
B4.2. Performing Arts, (Music, Drama, and
Theater)
B4.3. Arts and Crafts Skill Development
B4.4. Automotive Crafts Skill Development
B4.5. Bowling (12 Lanes or less)
B5. Sports Programs (Above Intramural Level)
B6. ”Stars and Stripes” Common Support
TOTAL CATEGORY B
_______________________
1
  Show dollars in thousands; show source of appropriations for DoD MWR USA and UFM practices.
2
  Show percentage of total APF operating support that is provided through DoD MWR USA and UFM practices, by
appropriation and for total.
3
  Show total APF operating support per Schedule A.
4
  Show MWR USA and UFM support as percentage of total APF operating support.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                     61
                                                                 ATTACHMENT 7 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                           DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007


                                                                           Total
                                                                           MWR                 Total
CATEGORY C – REVENUE-GENERATING                      SOURCE APPROPRIATIONS USA/UFM             Operating
PROGRAMS                                             (Specify)             Support             Support
                                                     ($000)1 /%2   ($000)1 /%2   ($000)1 /%2   ($000)3/%4
C1.1. Military Open Mess (Clubs)
C1.2. Restaurants, Snack Bars, and Other Food
Outlets
C2.1. Temporary Lodging Facility (official PCS
travel, operated as MWR Category C)
C2.2. Recreational Lodging (Cabins, Cottages,
Trailers, Trailer and/or RV Parks with Hook-ups)
C2.3. Joint-Service Facilities and/or Armed Forces
Recreation Centers
C3.1. Flying Program
C3.2. Parachute and Skydiving Program
C3.3. Rod and Gun Program
C3.4. Scuba and Diving Program
C3.5. Horseback Riding
C3.6. Video Program
C4.1. Resale (MWR-operated audio, photo,
recycling, car wash, etc.) C4.2. Amusement and
Recreation Machines and/or Gaming
C4.3. Bowling (Over 12 Lanes)
C4.4. Golf
C4.5. Boating (With Resale or Private Boat
Berthing)
C4.6. Equipment Rental (other than Outdoor
Recreation Equipment Checkout)
C4.7. Unofficial Commercial Travel Services
C4.8. Other
C5. Armed Service Exchanges
Common Support
TOTAL CATEGORY C
_______________________
1
  Show dollars in thousands; show source of appropriations for DoD MWR USA and UFM practices.
2
  Show percentage of total APF operating support that is provided through DoD MWR USA and UFM practices, by
appropriation and for total.
3
  Show total APF operating support per Schedule A.
4
  Show MWR USA and UFM support as percentage of total APF operating support.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                       62
                                                                   ATTACHMENT 7 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                            DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                              E8.A8. ATTACHMENT 8 TO ENCLOSURE 8

                           EXCHANGE SALES, PROFITS, AND DIVIDENDS


                           Exchange Sales, Profits, and Dividends as Reported by Exchanges
                                                      ($millions)
                                                           Actual         Actual          Actual    Actual
                                                             FY             FY             FY        FY
Exchange Sales
AAFES
NEXCOM
Navy Ships’ Stores
 Total NEXCOM
MCX
Total Exchange Sales

Exchange Profits
AAFES
NEXCOM
Navy Ships’ Stores
 Total NEXCOM
MCX
Total Exchange Profits

Profits as % of Sales
                                                  MWR Dividends
                                                   ($ millions)
                                                        Actual           Actual          Actual     Actual
                                                           FY             FY              FY         FY
AAFES Dividend to:
 Army MWR
 Army National Guard
 Navy MWR
 Air Force MWR
 Marine Corps MWR
  Total
NEXCOM Dividend to:
 Navy MWR
 Navy MWR (from Ships’ Stores)
  Total
MCX Dividend to:
 Marine Corps MWR
  Total
Total Exchange Dividends
Dividends as Percentage of Profits
Dividends as Percentage of Sales
Distribution of Declared Dividends
Army
Army National Guard
Navy
Air Force
Marine Corps
  Total



  Change 1, 03/20/08                                     63
                                                                    ATTACHMENT 8 TO ENCLOSURE 8
                                                       DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                          E8.A9. ATTACHMENT 9 TO ENCLOSURE 8

                           EXCHANGE MONTHLY SALES REPORT


                                   Current FY                    Prior FY

                                   Month        YTD      Month      YTD

Total (Direct) Sales


Same Store Sales


Other Sales (Specified)




Change 1, 03/20/08                         64
                                                  ATTACHMENT 9 TO ENCLOSURE 8,
                                                                DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                      E9. ENCLOSURE 9

                  TREASURY MANAGEMENT AND NAF INVESTMENTS


E9.1. GENERAL PRINCIPLES

   E9.1.1. Safety. Investment transactions shall ensure the highest degree of safety to minimize
both credit and market risk.

    E9.1.2. Liquidity. The NAF treasury shall be managed to ensure sufficient liquidity to meet
current obligations and future requirements for cash. Investments shall be made so that
disposition or sale prior to maturity is not required unless it is prudent due to prevailing
economic or business conditions. Except where prohibited under statute or international
agreement, investments shall have a stated final maturity not to exceed 5 years from the date of
purchase.

    E9.1.3. Yield. Investments shall earn a competitive rate of return to preserve value until the
NAFs are needed to finance obligations or requirements. NAFs shall not be invested under terms
that permit the interest rate to fall to zero.


E9.2. CASH AND TREASURY MANAGEMENT

NAF on-hand cash and local bank balances shall be limited to the minimum required to satisfy
immediate needs. Cash shall be in the form of U.S. currency or U.S. dollar instruments except
when foreign currency is required.

   E9.2.1. Funds not required for immediate purposes by installations and intermediary
echelons shall be centrally managed and invested by a DoD Component or Service headquarters
organization designated to perform treasury management.

      E9.2.1.1. The DoD Component or Military Service headquarters may enter into a joint
agreement or designate an executive agent to perform treasury management functions.
Agreements to establish an executive agent to perform inter-DoD Component or inter-Service
cash management shall be submitted to the PDUSD(P&R) for approval.

      E9.2.1.2. Cash concentration accounts and systems shall be centrally managed through
competitively negotiated banking contracts and agreements.

       E9.2.1.3. Management shall periodically review and document the requirements of each
NAFI to ensure that adequate funds have been invested properly to meet future expenditures to
fund replacement of tangible fixed assets, employee severance pay, pension plans, construction
and sustainment, restoration and modernization of facilities, mobilization contingencies, and new
operational programs that may be introduced.

  E9.2.2. The DoD Components shall establish procedures to identify the purposes for which
NAFs are held by all NAFIs and to ensure that NAFIs at the installation and intermediary


Change 1, 03/20/08                             65                        ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

command echelons do not retain cash or investments in excess of their requirements. These
procedures shall be based upon the premise of a “going concern” for NAFIs, considering future
cash inflows and outflows in determining the amount of funds required to be available to meet
requirements. Excess amounts shall be transferred to the successor NAFI, which may redirect
the NAFs to other NAFIs or identified requirements within the same Program Group.

    E9.2.3. Leveraged investing is permitted to help maintain portfolio liquidity, avoid
unnecessary fees and charges, and increase yield. Leveraged investing for speculative purposes
is prohibited. The only authorized mechanism for leveraged investing is through simultaneous
borrowing and investing. The use of financial derivatives to alter the risk/return profile of the
investment portfolio is prohibited. All charges associated with the borrowing, including interest
charged, transaction fees, and facility fees, shall be included in the overall portfolio results.
Borrowing charges shall be subtracted from the returns earned on the investment portfolio.


E9.3. AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

NAFs shall be maintained only in authorized financial institutions. The use of financial
institutions operating on DoD installations according to DoD Directive 1000.11 (Reference (bk))
is encouraged. The DoD Components shall issue policy to require capital adequacy standards
and other criteria for financial institutions and issuers of investment instruments. Compliance
with standards shall be confirmed with an independent rating service before investing and
periodically reviewed during the term of the investment. Within these parameters, investments
shall be competitively placed to ensure an acceptable yield.

   E9.3.1. U.S. Banks and Savings Associations. NAFs may only be invested in interest-
bearing depository accounts (checking accounts as provided by section 1832(a) of title 12,
U.S.C. (Reference (bl); savings accounts; share accounts; and certificates of deposit) in banks
and savings associations insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.

   E9.3.2. U.S. Credit Unions. In accordance with part 202 of title 31, CFR (Reference (bm)),
NAFs may be deposited in federally-chartered credit unions and those State-chartered credit
unions insured by the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (NCUSIF) of the National
Credit Union Administration or another insurance organization specifically qualified by the
Secretary of the Treasury. However, U.S. credit unions overseas shall be insured by the
NCUSIF. NAFs shall not be invested in credit union certificates of indebtedness unless the
NCUSIF extends specific insurance coverage to those accounts.

    E9.3.3. Overseas Financial Institutions. U.S. Military Banking Facilities (MBFs) or other
financial institutions designated by the Treasury Department are to be used to hold foreign
currencies at overseas locations when authorized under host-country law. In the absence of such
institutions, funds shall be held in foreign banks as designated by the Treasury Department.
During contingency operations, short-term accounts may be required to support U.S. Forces until
the Treasury Department designation can be obtained. Funds maintained in MBFs at overseas
locations are collateralized as specified by the U.S. Treasury under the terms of parent banking
institution contracts with the Department of Defense. Funds at minimum levels may be
maintained in other institutions overseas only when the institution has been designated as a
depository and financial agent of the U.S. Government by the Treasury Department. In making


Change 1, 03/20/08                              66                        ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                   DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

this designation, the U.S. Treasury shall attempt to obtain an agreement for collateralization.
Non-collateralized dollar balances for foreign financial institutions shall be limited to
clearing/sweep accounts. Such balances must be maintained at minimum levels.


E9.4. AUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS

    E9.4.1. Deposits. NAF deposits in financial institutions shall not exceed the amount that is
federally insured until the NAFI receives notice from the U.S. Treasury that the institution has
pledged obligations of the U.S. Government as collateral according to Reference (bm).
Collateral pledged under Reference (bm) and other collateral held in custody by a bank on behalf
of the NAFI shall be reviewed regularly to ensure that collateral is sufficient and acceptable.

        E9.4.1.1. An interest in trust fund account for several organizations, individuals, or
entities is limited to the maximum insured amount prescribed by law unless records are
maintained of the balance for each organization, individual, or entity and the records have been
accepted by the insurer. If FDIC coverage is desired, the DoD Components must maintain
records reflecting daily changes for each entity having an interest in the account; in all cases, the
information must be available within 3 days. For example, if one NAFI has $100,000 and
another $60,000, then total insurance coverage is $160,000.

       E9.4.1.2. When dealing with financial institutions and their insurers, it is imperative that
the NAFI be properly established in writing and designated. Complete and current
documentation of all those permitted to make withdrawals or otherwise direct actions related to
the account shall be provided to the financial institution.

       E9.4.1.3. Concentration banking systems shall fully meet requirements for Federal
insurance and pledge of collateral.

   E9.4.2. Government Securities. NAF investments are authorized for obligations of the
Federal Government, or for organizations or institutions sponsored or guaranteed by the U.S.
Government.

        E9.4.2.1. U.S. Treasury. The U.S. Treasury issues bills, bonds, and notes. U.S. Treasury
securities include Series EE and HH Savings Bonds and Separate Trading of Registered Interests
and Principal of Securities (STRIPS), which are Treasury issued zero-coupon products. Other
zero-coupon products (STRIPS, certificates of accrual on treasury securities, and municipal
certificates of accrual on treasury securities issued by other than the U.S. Treasury (i.e., where
the issuer is the obligor and the actual securities are held in escrow)) are not permissible for NAF
investment.

       E9.4.2.2. U.S. Government Agencies and Government-Sponsored Enterprises

               E.9.4.2.2.1. Authorized issuances include obligations of Government agencies,
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. Government and obligations issued by U.S.
Government-sponsored enterprises. Certain securities are guaranteed by the full faith and credit
of the U.S. Government (principal and interest) while other securities are issued by U.S.
Government-sponsored enterprises. These U.S. Government-sponsored enterprises were


Change 1, 03/20/08                               67                         ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

established and chartered by the Federal Government and are sponsored by a Government
agency, although they are privately owned and generally privately financed. There is a greater
risk associated with securities issued by Government-sponsored enterprises. Examples of
authorized Federal agency and Government-sponsored enterprise issuers are shown in
Attachment 1.

                E9.4.2.2.2. Investment products with yields derived from authorized agency
obligations and issued by the Federal agency or Government-sponsored enterprise are permitted
for NAF investment. Investment products with yields derived from authorized agency
obligations, but not issued by a U.S. Government agency or a U.S. Government-sponsored
enterprise, are not permitted for NAF investment. Such prohibited investments include real
estate mortgage investment conduits issued by private entities. Only mortgage pass-through
securities issued by U.S. Government agencies, fixed rate sequential bonds, and first priority
planned amortization class one bonds are authorized. Mortgage-backed securities shall have a
stated final maturity not to exceed 5 years. All other mortgage-backed securities are prohibited.
Prohibited securities include but are not limited to interest-only bonds, principal-only bonds, Z
bonds, planned amortization class bonds, floaters, and inverse floaters.

    E9.4.3. Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase Agreements. Repurchase and reverse
repurchase agreements shall be made only with primary Government securities dealers
designated by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or with banks that meet capital adequacy
standards established according to paragraph E9.3. Primary Government securities dealers must
meet and certify to the NAFI their compliance with the Capital Adequacy Guidelines for U.S.
Government Securities Dealers published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

        E9.4.3.1. Collateral in the amount of 100 percent of market value of the agreement, plus
interest, is required for overnight (defined as “next business day”) repurchase agreements.
Collateral for repurchase agreements is restricted to U.S. Government full faith and credit or
Government-sponsored enterprise securities. For agreements for periods longer than overnight,
collateral in the amount of 102 percent of market value plus interest is required for U.S. Treasury
securities (bills, notes, and bonds) and collateral in the amount of 104 percent of market value
plus interest is required for all other U.S. Government full faith and credit securities and U.S.
Government-sponsored enterprises. The underlying collateral pledged under a repurchase
agreement must have a stated final maturity not to exceed 5 years from the date of the repurchase
agreement and shall be marked-to-market daily to ensure the adequacy of collateral pledged.

      E9.4.3.2. Repurchase and reverse repurchase transactions shall be executed under written
agreement with the dealer using the Bond Market Association Master Repurchase Agreement.

    E9.4.4. Concentration Account Investment Facility. The DoD Component headquarters may
enter an overnight investment facility provided for under the cash concentration or
concentration-banking contract or agreements of record. Such investment facilities shall not
exceed 4 business days. Investment transactions are restricted to repurchase agreements backed
by collateral in the form of obligations of the U.S. Government, U.S. Government agencies, and
U.S. Government-sponsored enterprises. Such collateral must be deposited to a custody account
that is not commingled with the assets of the bank, in a value equal to 102 percent of the
investment transaction.



Change 1, 03/20/08                              68                        ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                  DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

   E9.4.5. Eurodollar. If the Eurodollar market offers significantly higher yields, funds may be
deposited with a U.S. bank dealing in this market. The bank must pledge collateral with the
Treasury Department according to the terms of Reference (bm). Collateral must be sufficient to
cover principal and interest at all times.

     E9.4.6. Foreign Investment for NAF Severance Pay and Benefit Funds. As a hedge against
exchange rate exposure, a NAFI may invest in foreign currency obligations (such as bonds or
other securities) of a sovereign government (the host country) in amounts not to exceed the local
currency value of the liabilities payable to the NAFI host-country local national employees when
a NAFI determines that the risk of foreign exchange rate fluctuation may adversely impact its
financial posture. These obligations shall be the host-country equivalent of U.S. Treasury
obligations. Safekeeping of such investments shall be in accordance with the intent of
procedures, taking into consideration the peculiarities of non-U.S. banking systems. In general,
it is advisable that a U.S. contractor-operated MBF, a U.S. bank, or a subsidiary of a U.S. bank
be named as the custodial institution.

   E9.4.7. Institutional Government Money Market Funds. Externally managed no-load money
market fund investments are authorized provided the money market fund’s investment securities
meet the criteria of authorized securities and issuing institutions, the average dollar-weight of the
money market fund is 90 days or less, the money market fund has an investment objective of
maintaining a net asset value of $1 per share, and the money market fund is regulated by the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission. Investment in any one money market fund shall not
exceed 10 percent of the total assets of the money market fund. Aggregate investment in money
market funds shall not exceed $50 million or 25 percent of the total market value of the NAF
investment portfolio assets. Eligible money market funds shall have assets of at least $1 billion.


E9.5. SAFEKEEPING

Government securities held as investments or as collateral for repurchase agreements must be
delivered to a third-party bank selected by the NAFI. The instruments cannot be mingled with
the assets of the bank and the NAFI must receive a safekeeping receipt for the securities. Third-
party banks must meet the same capital adequacy standards as those established by the DoD
Component for investment banks.




Change 1, 03/20/08                               69                         ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                  DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



E9.6. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS

In all cases, the funds should be available to the NAFI or the financial institution on the day the
transaction is made. Interest begins on the date of sale or purchase and ends on the day before
the transaction is completed.


E9.7. TREASURY MANAGEMENT, OVERSIGHT, AND CONTROL

The DoD Components shall require that fiduciary responsibility for NAFs be clearly assigned to
persons who direct or manage the treasury management programs at each echelon.

    E9.7.1. Each organization that manages NAF cash and investments shall identify the
positions and individuals who can be held personally responsible (subject to appropriate
disciplinary action and assessment of pecuniary liability) for losses suffered due to gross
negligence or willful misconduct.

    E9.7.2. To avoid inappropriate concentration of financial, credit, or operational risk, the
DoD Components shall establish written procedures governing cash management, bank account
management, investment management, debt management (to include leveraged investing),
financial risk management (to include foreign exchange hedging, interest rate hedging, and credit
risk management), and in-house liquidity management (in-house banks).

    E9.7.3. Only authorized and qualified personnel shall manage NAF investments. Persons
entrusted with administration and management of NAF cash and investments shall have the
education, experience, and training commensurate with their responsibilities. Personnel shall
exercise the degree of care and skill that is standard for the work they are employed to perform.

    E9.7.4. The Secretaries of the Military Departments are responsible for the oversight of
NAFs managed by the Military Services. The Heads of the DoD Components shall require the
establishment of a treasury oversight group for each organization that invests NAFs. At least one
member of the oversight group shall be an investment professional with cogent knowledge of
investment instruments, policies, practices, and procedures that is independent of the control or
management of the portfolio and the organization being reviewed; at least one member of the
oversight group shall be a representative of the Secretary of the Military Department concerned.

        E9.7.4.1. The designated treasury oversight group shall meet at least semi-annually to
review Military Service treasury management policies, portfolio objectives, management
practices, holdings, strategy, and operating results, and to approve those policies governing
instruments and institutions for investments and borrowing. The reviews shall ensure the
objectives, strategies, and parameters of these policies align with the objectives and strategies of
the fund as identified in paragraph E9.2.2. and shall determine compliance with policies and
other guidance regarding safety, liquidity, and yield. The reviews shall consider policy,
shortcomings of the policy, and the changes in fund risk tolerance that required policies be
updated. The results of the reviews shall address corrective action and shall be reported annually
to the Head of the DoD Component concerned.



Change 1, 03/20/08                               70                         ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                           DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

        E9.7.4.2. To ensure investments and liquidity are congruent with the purpose of the
portfolio, the investment oversight group shall determine the primary purpose of the funds as one
of the following.

         E9.7.4.2.1. Daily cash and liquidity management funds with the purpose of
maximizing current income while preserving principal and daily liquidity.

           E9.7.4.2.2. Strategic investment funds with the purpose of maximizing income while
preserving principal to fund capital improvements or other long-term projects.

             E9.7.4.2.3. Segregated funds with the purpose of maximizing income while
preserving principal to fund workers’ compensation, severance liabilities, or other long-term
liabilities.

              E9.7.4.3. Liquidity and authorized transactions shall be subject to the restrictions
in Table E9.T1.

                Table E9.T1. Restrictions on Liquidity and Authorized Transactions

                         Daily Cash and Liquidity           Strategic Investment
     Policy Area                                                                           Segregated Funds
                           Management Funds                        Funds
Liquidity (Maturity    Maximum term of 1 year            Maximum term of 5 years      Maximum term of 5 years
Term Restriction)
Authorized             All investments described in   All investments described       All investments described
Transactions           paragraph E9.4 except:         in paragraph E9.4.              in paragraph E9.4.
                       – Any securities with embedded
                       derivatives including callable
                       bonds
                       – Agency securities including
                       all mortgage-backed securities
Statement of Purpose   – To maximize current income To maximize income while To maximize income while
on Risk Profile        while preserving principal and preserving principal to fund preserving principal to fund
                       daily liquidity by investing in    capital improvements or     workers’ compensation
                       high-quality money market          other long-term projects by liabilities, severance
                       securities and government          investing primarily in      liabilities, or other long-
                       short-term debt instruments        government, mortgage-       term liabilities by investing
                       – Invests only in securities rated backed, and asset-backed    primarily in government,
                       at least A1 by S&P or P1 by        securities                  mortgage-backed, and
                       Moody’s Investors Service                                      asset-backed securities

        E9.7.4.4. The treasury manager shall meet at least semi-annually with their DoD
Component-designated treasury oversight group. The purpose of the meeting shall be to review
the overall fund position, assess known or anticipated market conditions, and review investment
strategies to meet overall MWR and NAF program objectives and approved cash flow
requirements. The oversight group shall evaluate compliance with DoD guidance, review
management reports, and audit results, and shall review and endorse the Annual NAF Treasury
Management Report. (See paragraph E9.9. and Attachments 3 through 9.)




Change 1, 03/20/08                                     71                             ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

        E9.7.4.5. In advance of each calendar year, the treasury oversight group shall determine
the benchmark that will be used to evaluate portfolio performance. The benchmark shall be
unambiguous, measurable, and appropriate. Attachment 2 provides the publicly available indices
authorized to create the portfolio benchmark. The benchmark shall reflect the broad risk and
return characteristics of the authorized portfolio holdings. A composite benchmark may be
comprised of several indices provided the names and weights of each index are clearly defined.
At year end, the benchmark return shall be compared to the portfolio average annual yield and
deviations evaluated based on investment maturity, credit factors, and investment instruments.

        E9.7.4.6. The investment portfolio shall be independently marked-to-market on at least a
semi-annual basis and with each issuance of a financial statement using prices listed on an
exchange; prices provided by an independent data provider, such as Reuters or Bloomberg;
prices provided by brokers and investment dealers; or valuations derived using mathematical
models and pricing algorithms.

    E9.7.5. The fund manager of the investing NAFI shall immediately notify the treasury
oversight group of losses of principal or circumstances where investments produce no yield.
Significant occurrences or losses of principal or absence of yield shall be immediately reported
to the treasury oversight group, the respective board of directors, the DoD Component, and the
PDUSD(P&R).

    E9.7.6. Credit risk is inherent in foreign currency hedging (forward contracts and foreign
currency options) authorized at paragraph E10.2 and interest rate hedging (interest rate swaps
and forward rate agreements) authorized at paragraph E9.8. The credit risk arises when the
mark-to-market valuations of outstanding derivative contracts are greater than zero (i.e., the
counterparty owes the DoD Component). The DoD Components shall ensure that credit risk is
identified, measured, and reported annually for foreign currency and interest rate hedging.


E9.8. BORROWING AND INTEREST RATE HEDGING

         E9.8.1. The DoD Components, Military Services, and Service headquarters that engage
in borrowing shall maintain a listing of the financial institutions approved for borrowing. The
listing shall include the each institution’s credit rating, financial covenants, and maximum
borrowing limits.

       E9.8.2. All borrowings shall be denominated in U.S. dollars. Authorized borrowing
vehicles for working capital are limited to uncommitted bank lines of credit and revolving
committed bank credit facilities with a maximum term of 5 years. One-time loan agreements for
individual capital projects may be executed with terms not to exceed 30 years.

        E9.8.3. Interest rate exposure shall be measured against current borrowings and
anticipated operating and capital requirements. Interest rate hedges shall be associated directly
to underlying debt and shall not exceed the maturity of the underlying debt. Interest rate hedging
instruments are limited to interest rate swaps, forward rate agreements, and treasury locks..

       E9.8.4. All interest rate hedge contracts shall be transacted with authorized
counterparties. The counterparties shall be creditworthy institutions with a short term credit


Change 1, 03/20/08                              72                        ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                     DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

rating of A-1 (S&P) and P-1 (Moody’s) and a long term credit rating of at least A (S&P) and A
(Moody’s); an International Swap Dealers Association (ISDA) agreement shall be in place with
each counterparty; all counterparties shall be authorized by the Military Service or joint-Service
headquarters prior to initiating hedging activity; and counterparty credit worthiness shall be
monitored on at least an annual basis.

         E9.8.5. The Annual NAF Treasury Management Report submitted by the DoD
Components to the PDUSD(P&R) in accordance with paragraph E9.9. shall include a report of
all interest rate hedging activities, to include a list of all contracts outstanding as of the end of the
year and for any portion of the year (counterparty, notional amounts, contract type, maturity date,
mark-to-market values or realized gains or losses, associated underlying exposure, and fixed and
floating interest rates), and the short term and long term S&P and Moody’s credit ratings for all
authorized counterparties.


E9.9. ANNUAL NAF TREASURY MANAGEMENT REPORT

The DoD Components shall require the respective oversight group(s) to prepare a report of NAF
cash and investments, borrowing, and hedging as of December 31 each year covering all NAFIs
and NAF cash and investments managed within their Components. The DoD Components shall
submit the Annual NAF Treasury Management Report to the PDUSD(P&R) by April 1 of the
following year. The submission shall contain an executive summary, Oversight Report, and
Performance Report.

    E9.9.1. Executive Summary. The executive summary shall describe the goals, objectives,
and benchmarks established for each fund managed, and the relationship of those goals and
objectives to the overall NAF and MWR program purposes and cash flow requirements. The
narrative shall describe the overall treasury management philosophy and investment policies and
practices for safety, liquidity, and yield; significant events or accomplishments; investment
portfolio analysis; rate of return analysis; change in benchmarks; and other appropriate
information.

       E9.9.1.1. Safety. The discussion of safety shall address risk tolerance guidelines for
term institutions and investments, DoD Component and Military Service oversight, third-party
evaluations conducted since the last report (to include independent actuarial and audit reviews),
borrowing and lending strategies, and investment in foreign currency. The nature, amount, and
circumstances of portfolio losses shall be disclosed fully.

        E9.9.1.2. Liquidity. The liquidity section shall identify the portfolio management
requirements (purpose of assets, future sources, and uses of NAFs and portfolio goals), specify
strategies for investment liquidity (to include short-term borrowing), and describe cash
concentration systems.




Change 1, 03/20/08                                 73                          ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



        E9.9.1.3. Yield. The yield analysis shall describe asset allocation, determination of
maturity, and philosophy concerning active or passive management style. Comparison shall be
made to accepted industry indices that were pre-determined as benchmark(s) for evaluating
portfolio performance. An explanation of why the fund return deviated from the benchmark
shall be provided.

        E9.9.2. Oversight Report. (See Attachment 3.) The Oversight Report shall identify
treasury management positions and individuals that can be held personally responsible for
treasury transactions. In addition to those persons, the names and titles/organizations of the
individuals who have been appointed to the fund’s treasury oversight committee shall be
furnished. The report shall provide the dates of the oversight meetings, independent
management and compliance audits, and internal management and compliance audits conducted
since the last report. In addressing audits, the most current independent public accountant
opinion shall be furnished and a summary provided of the treasury management audits, the
agency performing the audits, the major audit findings, and the resulting management action.
The minutes of the oversight meetings conducted since the last report shall be furnished.

     E9.9.3. Performance Report. The Performance Report shall contain the funds’ balances for
all cash and investments, the portfolio composition and yield as of year-end, and the weighted
average annual yield.

       E9.9.3.1. Cash and Investment Balances Ownership Report. (See Attachment 4.) The
Cash and Investment Balances Ownership Report shall provide balance sheet information of all
cash on deposit in financial institutions and investments held by NAFIs within the DoD
Component as of December 31. The report shall include a breakout of ownership by Military
Service, major command, installation level, and other echelons.

       E9.9.3.2. Cash and Investment Portfolio Report. (See Attachment 5.) The Cash and
Investment Portfolio Report shall provide information as of December 31, to include book value
and market value of investments, and concentration banking accounts. This summary provides
management information for monitoring progress of the funds.

        E9.9.3.3. Investment Portfolio Annual Yield. (See Attachment 6.) Each Service
headquarters that manages central investment funds shall prepare the report on annual yield.
Yield shall be computed both as total rate of return (including unrealized gains and losses) and
realized return, and before and after portfolio expenses. Any borrowing charges associated with
simultaneous investing and borrowing activities shall be subtracted from the returns earned on
the investment portfolio.

           E9.9.3.3.1. The formula in Table E9.T2. shall be used to calculate the total rate of
return.




Change 1, 03/20/08                             74                         ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                          DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



                     Table E9.T2. Formula for Calculating Total Rate of Return

                            Total Rate of Return = EMV – BMV – CF
                                                         ∑
                                                             n
                                                 BMV +     i =1
                                                                  (CFi X Wi)

EMV = market value of the portfolio at the end of the period before any cash flows but including
accrued income for the period.

BMV = market value of the portfolio at the beginning of the period, including any cash flows at
the end of the previous period and including accrued income up to the end of the previous period.

                                         ∑
                                             n
CF = net cash flows within the period.    i =1
                                                  (CFi X Wi) is the sum of each cash flow, CFi
multiplied by its weight, Wi.

Weight = proportion of the total number of days in the period that cash flow has been held in the
portfolio. Weight = (total number of calendar days in the period less the number of calendar days
since the beginning of the period in which the cash flow occurred) divided by the total number of
calendar days in the period.


            E9.3.3.2. The formula in Table E9.T3. shall be used to calculate the realized return.



                     Table E9.T3. Formula for Calculating Total Rate of Return

             Realized Gains - Realized Losses + Accrued Interest               x   365
              Investment Balance          days in the month


         E9.9.3.4. Outstanding Loans. (See Attachment 7.) This summary shall be prepared to
disclose fully each outstanding loan, line of credit, and other borrowing facilities as of December
31, to include the name of the lending institution, the loan balance or drawn amount, the total
credit line, the loan rate, and the maturity date.

       E9.9.3.5. Loan Portfolio. (See Attachment 8.) This summary shall be prepared to
disclose the average loans, lines of credit, and other borrowing facilities outstanding over the 12-
month period. The rate paid shall be a time- and dollar-weighted average for the month and for
the year exclusive and inclusive of interest rate hedging.

        E9.9.3.6. Credit Exposure Report. (See Attachment 9.) This summary shall be prepared
to disclose fully the credit exposure across all treasury activities including investing, foreign
exchange, and interest rate hedging. Investments shall be grouped by counterparty (dealer or
broker, not third party custodian).




Change 1, 03/20/08                                    75                           ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                  DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

       E9.9.3.7. Foreign Currency Hedging Report. This report is required by paragraph
E10.2.4.


E9.10. TREASURY MANAGERS’ MEETINGS

Senior NAF treasury management personnel of the DoD Components shall meet semiannually
with representatives of the PDUSD(P&R) to review NAF treasury management and investment
practices.

    E9.10.1. The DoD Component headquarters NAF treasury managers shall present the results
of their most recent Annual Treasury Management Report annually at the DoD NAF Treasury
Management Subcommittee meeting. Each of the Military Services shall provide their current
treasury policies, procedures, and audit compliance, with Military Service and DoD Inspector
General findings. A summary of the meeting shall be issued by the PDUSD(P&R).

    E9.10.2. A second meeting shall be hosted each year by the Military Services to provide a
forum for the free exchange of information concerning short-term and long-term investments,
rates of return, financial institutions, and treasury management practices. The chair shall rotate
among the Military Services. A summary of the meeting shall be issued by the PDUSD(P&R).


Attachments – 9
  E9.A1. Accepted Issuers of Government and Agency Securities
  E9.A2. Indices
  E9.A3. Oversight Report
  E9.A4. Cash and Investment Balances Ownership Report
  E9.A5. Cash and Investment Portfolio Report
  E9.A6. Investment Portfolio Yield
  E9.A7. Outstanding Loans
  E9.A8. Loan Portfolio
  E9.A9. Credit Exposure Report




Change 1, 03/20/08                              76                         ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                      DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                          E9.A1. ATTACHMENT 1 TO ENCLOSURE 9

          ACCEPTED ISSUERS OF GOVERNMENT AND AGENCY SECURITIES


                           Issuer                                            Type of Issuer
 Export-Import Bank of the United States*                     U.S. Federal Agency
 Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation (Farmer Mac)       Government-sponsored enterprises
 Federal Farm Credit Banks (FFCB)                             Government-sponsored enterprises
 Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB)                                Government-sponsored enterprises
 Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation                       Government-sponsored enterprises
 (FHLMC, “Freddie Mac”)
 Federal Housing Administration (FHA)*                        U.S. Federal Agency
 Federal National Mortgage (FNMA, “Fannie Mae”)               Government-sponsored enterprises
 Financing Corporation (FICO)                                 Government-sponsored enterprises
 Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA)*             U.S. Federal Agency
 Private Export Funding Corporation (PEFCO)                   U.S. Federal Agency
 Small Business Administration (SBA)*                         U.S. Federal Agency
 Student Loan Marketing Association                           Government-sponsored enterprises
 (SLMA, “Sallie Mae”)
 Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)                             U.S. Federal Agency
 USDA Rural Development*                                      U.S. Federal Agency
 U.S. Treasury*
 U.S. Postal Service*                                         U.S. Federal Agency
 Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority               U.S. Federal Agency
 (WashMet) *
 * Securities issued by the agency are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. Government




Change 1, 03/20/08                                 77
                                                              ATTACHMENT 1 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                E9.A2. ATTACHMENT 2 TO ENCLOSURE 9

                                                         INDICES


                                                                   Recommended
     Investment                                          Benchmark                     Source Where Benchmark May Be
                            Name of Benchmark                      Benchmarking
     Instrument                                           Maturity                                Obtained
                                                                    Frequency
Certificate of Deposit Federal Reserve Bank of St.       1-month      Semi-annually   http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/
(1 Month)              Louis                                                          categories/121
                       1-Month Certificate of Deposit:
                       Secondary Market Rate
Certificate of Deposit Federal Reserve Bank of St.       3-months     Semi-annually   http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/
(3 Months)             Louis                                                          categories/121
                       3-Month Certificate of Deposit:
                       Secondary Market Rate
Certificate of Deposit Federal Reserve Bank of St.       6-months     Semi-annually   http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/
(6 Months)             Louis                                                          categories/121
                       6-Month Certificate of Deposit:
                       Secondary Market Rate
Treasury Bills         Merrill Lynch                     3-months     Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(3 Months)             3-Month U.S. Treasury Bill                                     bin/MLIndex.asp
                       Index                                                          Ticker : G0O1
Treasury Bills         Merrill Lynch                     6-months     Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(6 Months)             6-Month U.S. Treasury Bill                                     bin/MLIndex.asp
                       Index                                                          Ticker : G0O2
Treasury Bills         Merrill Lynch                     1-year       Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(1 Year)               1-Year U.S. Treasury Bill Index                                bin/MLIndex.asp
                                                                                      Ticker : G0O3
Treasury Notes         Merrill Lynch                   1-year         Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(1 Year)               1-Year U.S. Treasury Note Index                                bin/MLIndex.asp
                                                                                      Ticket: GC03
Treasury Notes         Merrill Lynch                     1.78 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(2 Years)              1-3 Year U.S. Treasury Index                                   bin/MLIndex.asp
                                                                                      Ticker: G1O2
Treasury Notes         Merrill Lynch U.S. Treasury       2.85 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(3 Years)              Current                                                        bin/MLIndex.asp
                       3-Year Index                                                   Ticker: GA03
Treasury Notes         Merrill Lynch                     4.05 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(4 Years)              1-5 Year U.S. Treasury Index                                   bin/MLIndex.asp
                                                                                      Ticker: G2O2
Treasury Notes         Merrill Lynch U.S. Treasury       4.94 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(5 Years)              Current                                                        bin/MLIndex.asp
                       5-Year Index                                                   Ticker: GA05
U.S. Agency            Merrill Lynch AAA U.S.            1.86 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Securities (2 Years)   Agencies                                                       bin/MLIndex.asp
                       1-3 Year Index                                                 Ticker: G1P0
U.S. Agency            Merrill Lynch AAA U.S.            3.96 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Securities (4 Years)   Agencies                                                       bin/MLIndex.asp
                       3-5 Year Index                                                 Ticker: G2P0
U.S. Agency Freddie    Merrill Lynch U.S. Agencies       5.56 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Mac Notes              Freddie Mac Reference Notes                                    bin/MLIndex.asp
(5 Years)              Index                                                          Ticker: G0PF




Change 1, 03/20/08                                            78
                                                                        ATTACHMENT 2 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                               DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                                                  Recommended
     Investment                                         Benchmark                    Source Where Benchmark May Be
                            Name of Benchmark                     Benchmarking
     Instrument                                          Maturity                               Obtained
                                                                   Frequency
U.S. Agency Fannie     Merrill Lynch U.S. Agencies     5.41 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Mae Notes              Fannie Mae Benchmark Notes                                   bin/MLIndex.asp
(5 Years)              Index                                                        Ticker: G0PN
AAA Asset Backed       Merrill Lynch U.S. Asset-Backed 1.23 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Securities             Securities                                                   bin/MLIndex.asp
(1 Year)               0-3 Year Fixed Rate Index                                    Ticker: R1A0
AAA Asset Backed       Merrill Lynch U.S. Asset-Backed 3.79 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Securities             Securities                                                   bin/MLIndex.asp
(4 Years)              3-5 Year Fixed Rate Index                                    Ticker: R2A0
Mortgage Backed        Merrill Lynch U.S. Mortgage     2.61 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Securities             Backed Securities                                            bin/MLIndex.asp
(3 Years)              0-3 Year WAL Index                                           Ticker: M1A0
Mortgage Backed        Merrill Lynch U.S. Mortgage     4.06 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Securities             Backed Securities Index                                      bin/MLIndex.asp
(4 Years)                                                                           Ticker: M2A0
Mortgage Backed        Merrill Lynch U.S. Mortgage     4.36 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Securities             Backed Securities                                            bin/MLIndex.asp
(5 Years)              3-5 Year WAL Index                                           Ticker: M0A0
U.S. Treasury          Merrill Lynch U.S. Treasury     1-year       Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
STRIPS                 STRIPS Constant Maturity                                     bin/MLIndex.asp
(1 Year)               1-Year Index                                                 Ticker: S001
U.S. Treasury          Merrill Lynch U.S. Treasury     2-year       Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
STRIPS                 STRIPS Constant Maturity                                     bin/MLIndex.asp
(2 Years)              2-Year Index                                                 Ticker: S002
U.S. Treasury          Merrill Lynch U.S. Treasury     3-year       Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
STRIPS                 STRIPS Constant Maturity                                     bin/MLIndex.asp
(3 Years)              3-Year Index                                                 Ticker: S003
U.S. Treasury          Merrill Lynch U.S. Treasury     4-year       Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
STRIPS                 STRIPS Constant Maturity                                     bin/MLIndex.asp
(4 Years)              4-Year Index                                                 Ticker: S004
U.S. Treasury          Merrill Lynch U.S. Treasury     5-year       Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
STRIPS                 STRIPS Constant Maturity                                     bin/MLIndex.asp
(5 Years)              5-Year Index                                                 Ticker: S005
Treasury Inflation     Merrill Lynch U.S. Treasury     10-year      Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Protected Securities   Inflation Linked Index                                       bin/MLIndex.asp
(TIPS)                                                                              Ticker: G0QI
Repurchase             Federal Reserve Bank of St.     1 Day        Semi-annually   http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/
Agreements             Louis Effective Federal Funds                                search/fed+funds/1
                       Rate
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch Euro Government 0.35 years     Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Euros) –              Bill Index                                                   bin/MLIndex.asp
3 Months                                                                            Ticker: EGB0
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch EMU Direct        0.47 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Euros) –              Governments                                                  bin/MLIndex.asp
6 Months               0-1 Year Index                                               Ticker: EG0A
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch EMU Direct        1.85 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Euros) –              Governments                                                  bin/MLIndex.asp
2 Years                1-3 Year Index                                               Ticker: EG01
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch EMU Direct        2.77 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Euros) –              Governments                                                  bin/MLIndex.asp
3 Years                1-5 Year Index                                               Ticker: EG0V




Change 1, 03/20/08                                          79
                                                                      ATTACHMENT 2 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                            DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                                              Recommended
     Investment                                     Benchmark                     Source Where Benchmark May Be
                             Name of Benchmark                Benchmarking
     Instrument                                      Maturity                                Obtained
                                                               Frequency
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch EMU Direct    3.84 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Euros) –               Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
4 Years                 3-5 Year Index                                           Ticker: EG02
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Australian    1.90 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Australian Dollar) –   Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
2 Years                 1-3 Year Index                                           Ticker : G1T0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Australian    2.89 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Australian Dollar) –   Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
3 Years                 1-5 Year Index                                           Ticker : GVT0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Australian    4.15 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Australian Dollar) –   Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
4 Years                 3-5 Year Index                                           Ticker : G2T0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Canadian      2.02 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Canadian Dollar) –     Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
2 Years                 1-3 Year Index                                           Ticker: G1C0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Canadian      2.9 years    Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Canadian Dollar) –     Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
3 Years                 1-5 Year Index                                           Ticker: GVC0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Canadian      3.98 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Canadian Dollar) –     Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
4 Years                 3-5 Year Index                                           Ticker: G2C0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Danish        1.99 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Danish Krone) –        Governments      1-3 Year                                bin/MLIndex.asp
2 Years                 Index                                                    Ticker: G1M0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Danish        3.06 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Danish Krone) –        Governments      1-5 Year                                bin/MLIndex.asp
3 Years                 Index                                                    Ticker: GVM0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Danish        4.36 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Danish Krone) –        Governments      3-5 Year                                bin/MLIndex.asp
4 Years                 Index                                                    Ticker: G2M0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Japanese      2.05 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Japanese Yen) –        Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
2 Years                 1-3 Year Index                                           Ticker: G1Y0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Japanese      3.09 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Japanese Yen) –        Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
3 Years                 1-5 Year Index                                           Ticker: GVY0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Japanese      4.05 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Japanese Yen) –        Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
4 Years                 3-5 Year Index                                           Ticker: G2Y0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Swedish       1.87 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Swedish Krona) –       Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
2 Years                 1-3 Year Index                                           Ticker: G1W0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Swedish       2.95 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Swedish Krona) –       Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
3 Years                 1-5 Year Index                                           Ticker: GVW0
Foreign Bonds           Merrill Lynch Swedish       3.97 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Swedish Krona) –       Governments                                              bin/MLIndex.asp
4 Years                 3-5 Year Index                                           Ticker: G2W0
Foreign Bonds (Swiss Merrill Lynch Swiss            1.84 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Franc) – 2 Years     Governments       1-3 Year                                  bin/MLIndex.asp
                     Index                                                       Ticker: G1S0




Change 1, 03/20/08                                       80
                                                                   ATTACHMENT 2 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                           DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                                             Recommended
     Investment                                    Benchmark                     Source Where Benchmark May Be
                            Name of Benchmark                Benchmarking
     Instrument                                     Maturity                                Obtained
                                                              Frequency
Foreign Bonds (Swiss Merrill Lynch Swiss           3 years      Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Franc) – 3 Years     Governments       1-5 Year                                 bin/MLIndex.asp
                     Index                                                      Ticker: GVS0
Foreign Bonds (Swiss Merrill Lynch Swiss           3.67 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
Franc) – 4 Years     Governments       3-5 Year                                 bin/MLIndex.asp
                     Index                                                      Ticker: G2S0
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch UK Gilt       0.71 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(British Pound) –      0-1 Year Index                                           bin/MLIndex.asp
9 Months                                                                        Ticker: G0LA
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch UK Gilts      2.26 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(British Pound) –      1-3 Year Index                                           bin/MLIndex.asp
2 Years                                                                         Ticker: G1L0
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch UK Gilts      3.08 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(British Pound) –      1-5 Year Index                                           bin/MLIndex.asp
3 Years                                                                         Ticker: GVL0
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch UK Gilts      4 years      Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(British Pound) –      3-5 Year Index                                           bin/MLIndex.asp
4 Years                                                                         Ticker: G2L0
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch Singapore     5.51 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Singapore Dollar) –   Government Index                                         bin/MLIndex.asp
5 Years                                                                         Ticker: G0SP
Foreign Bonds          Merrill Lynch South Korea   4.61 years   Semi-annually   http://www.mlindex.ml.com/gispublic/
(Korean Won) –         Government Index                                         bin/MLIndex.asp
5 Years                                                                         Ticker: G0SK




Change 1, 03/20/08                                      81
                                                                  ATTACHMENT 2 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                            DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                         E9.A3. ATTACHMENT 3 TO ENCLOSURE 9

                                  OVERSIGHT REPORT


Fund Name:
Investment Management Positions Assigned Fiduciary Responsibility:
Fund Custodian/Manager: _________________ Phone: _________________
Others (List):



NAF Investment Steering/Oversight Committee Members:
Name*                                         Title/Organization



*(List Chairman First)

Steering/Oversight Meetings Conducted Since Last Report:
____________________________________(Dates)
(Attach Meeting Minutes)

Independent Financial and Compliance Audits Conducted Since Last Report:
____________________________________
(Attach Audit Report)

Internal Management and Compliance Audits Conducted Since Last Report:
____________________________________




Signed:

____________________________________          ____________________________________
Fund Custodian                                Chairman, Investment Oversight Committee




Change 1, 03/20/08                          82
                                                     ATTACHMENT 3 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                             DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                        E9.A4. ATTACHMENT 4 TO ENCLOSURE 9

                 CASH AND INVESTMENT BALANCES OWNERSHIP REPORT


 Military Service:_______________________
 Investment Fund:_________________________      NAF Balance as of December 31, ______
                                                           Percent of Fund      Prior Year
                                             Amount            Balance           Amount
 Group I, Military MWR Programs
  Service Level                              $______          _______           $______
  Major Command/Region Level                 $______          _______           $______
  Installation Level                         $______          _______           $______
  Other                                      $______          _______           $______
 Total Group I, Investments                  $______          _______           $______
 Group II, Armed Services Exchange
 Programs                                    $______          _______           $______
  Service Level                              $______          _______           $______
  Major Command/Region Level                 $______          _______           $______
  Installation Level                         $______          _______           $______
  Other                                      $______          _______           $______
 Total Group II, Investments

 Group III, Civilian MWR Programs            $______          _______           $______
  Service Level                              $______          _______           $______
  Major Command/Region Level                 $______          _______           $______
  Installation Level                         $______          _______           $______
  Other                                      $______          _______           $______
 Total Group III, Investments

 Group IV, Lodging Programs                  $______          _______           $______
  Service Level                              $______          _______           $______
  Major Command/Region Level                 $______          _______           $______
  Installation Level                         $______          _______           $______
  Other                                      $______          _______           $______
 Total Group IV, Investments

 Group V, Supplemental Mission Funds         $______          _______           $______
  Service Level                              $______          _______           $______
  Major Command/Region Level                 $______          _______           $______
  Installation Level                         $______          _______           $______
  Other                                      $______          _______           $______
 Total Group V, Investments

 Group VI, Special Purpose Central       $______              _______          $______
 Funds                                 Not Applicable                        Not Applicable
  Service Level                        Not Applicable                        Not Applicable
  Major Command/Region Level           Not Applicable                        Not Applicable
  Installation Level                     $______              _______          $______
  Other
 Total Group VI, Investments

 Total Balance



Change 1, 03/20/08                            83
                                                        ATTACHMENT 4 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                            DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                         E9.A5. ATTACHMENT 5 TO ENCLOSURE 9

                      CASH AND INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO REPORT


                                   As of December 31, ______
                  Current                                 Weighted
                                                                       Market        Range of
                Amortized        % of                     Average
                                                                       Value of       Credit
                   Book          Port-       Current      Maturity
                                                                      Securities1    Ratings2
   Asset          Value1         folio        Yield       (in days)
Cash3           $         %                 %            days         Note 4
Repos           $         %                 %            days         Note 4
Fixed           $         %                 %            days         Note 4
 Income
 CDs         $            %              %             days           Note 4
Govt MM
 Funds       $            %              %             days
Treasury and Agency Securities (Specify to level of detail in paragraph E9.A1.)
FHLB           $             %              %            days         $
FNMA           $             %              %            days         $
FHLMC          $             %              %            days         $
FFCB           $             %              %            days         $
SLMA           $             %              %            days         $
GNMA           $             %              %            days         $
Treasury       $             %              %            days         $
Other          $             %              %            days         $

Total          $             %              %            days         $
Portfolio
Notes:

1
    Balances as of December 31.
2
    Indicate lowest and highest credit ratings.
3
    Includes collected cash on deposit in concentration accounts.
4
    Market Value shall be book value for cash, repos, CDs, and other cash equivalents.




    Change 1, 03/20/08                            84
                                                       ATTACHMENT 5 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                      DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                          E9.A6. ATTACHMENT 6 TO ENCLOSURE 9

                                INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO YIELD


                   Avg. Invested1            Average2          Dollar Weighted         Dollar Weighted
    Month            Balance                 Maturity               Yield                   Yield
                                                               Realized Return5         Total Return6
 January
 February
 March
 April
 May
 June
 July
 August
 September
 October
 November
 December

 Total           Total3 ($)             Total3                 Total4 (%)             Total4(%)

 Benchmark:                                                                           %



 Note 1. Does not include concentration accounts.
 Note 2. Average maturity is calculated as the weighted average days to maturity at month end.
 Note 3. Weighted average sum of column divided by 12.
 Note 4. Weighted annual yield.
 Note 5. Realized Return is calculated using the following formula.
 Realized Gains - Realized Losses + Accrued Interest X   365 =     Annual Yield
          Average Investment Balance                     days in   (Realized Total Return)
                                                         period

 Note 6. Total Rate of Return is calculated using the following formula.
 EMV – BMV – CF                         Annual Yield
 BMV + ∑i =1 (CFi X Wi)
         n                              (Total Rate of
                                        Return)




Change 1, 03/20/08                                  85
                                                              ATTACHMENT 6 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                              DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                           E9.A7. ATTACHMENT 7 TO ENCLOSURE 9

                                  OUTSTANDING LOANS


                                  As of December 31, ______
                                          LOANS


                   Outstanding
    Lending
                  Loan Balance        Loan Rate        Maturity Date
   Institution

                           $              %                   Date




                 Total $


                   LINES OF CREDIT/OTHER BORROWING FACILITIES


    Lending        Total Credit        Drawn
   Institution        Line             Amount          Interest Rate     Terms/Expiration

                           $              $                    %




                     Total $            Total $




Change 1, 03/20/08                            86
                                                      ATTACHMENT 7 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                 DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                        E9.A8. ATTACHMENT 8 TO ENCLOSURE 9

                                     LOAN PORTFOLIO




                  Average                          Dollar Weighted          Dollar Weighted
                 Outstanding       Average
   Month                                             Interest Rate       Interest Rate Inclusive
                                   Maturity2
                Loan Balance1                    Exclusive of Hedging          of Hedging

 January
 February
 March
 April
 May
 June
 July
 August
 September
 October
 November
 December

                     Total3          Total3             Total3




 Note 1. Includes loans, lines of credit, and other borrowing facilities.
 Note 2. Average loan and lines of credit maturity is calculated as the weighted average days to
 maturity at month end.
 Note 3. Weighted average sum of column divided by 12.




Change 1, 03/20/08                             87
                                                         ATTACHMENT 8 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                        E9.A9. ATTACHMENT 9 TO ENCLOSURE 9

                                CREDIT EXPOSURE REPORT


    Report Section                               Presentation Guidelines
Investments                Total of investments grouped by counterparty.*
Foreign Exchange           Total of the current mark-to-market value for all foreign exchange
                           contracts grouped by counterparty. The amount outstanding for
                           each counterparty may be either a net payable or receivable to the
                           Service.
Interest Rate Hedges       Subtotals of the current mark-to-market value for all interest rate
                           hedge contracts grouped by counterparty. The amount outstanding
                           for each counterparty may be either a net payable or receivable to
                           the Service.
Aggregate Exposure         Grand totals for credit exposure from each of the above sections
                           grouped by counterparty. This section nets exposures across the
                           various activities to show the total amount of exposure to each
                           counterparty.

*Counterparty includes dealer or broker, not third party custodian.




Change 1, 03/20/08                             88
                                                         ATTACHMENT 9 TO ENCLOSURE 9
                                                                DoDI 1015.15, October 31, 2007

                                    E10. ENCLOSURE 10

                                    FOREIGN CURRENCY

E10.1. HOLDING FOREIGN CURRENCY

   E10.1.1. Speculation in foreign currencies is prohibited. However, in foreign areas there
may be valid reasons to acquire and use foreign currencies.

    E10.1.2. Foreign currencies required to meet payrolls and related costs, operating
obligations, and construction payments shall be obtained as needed. Foreign currency holdings
to pay the cost of routine operating expenses normally shall not exceed the level required for a
30-day period. Under exceptional conditions, the DoD Components may approve the holding of
a 45-day foreign currency requirement. Foreign currencies may be held at the discretion of the
DoD Components concerned in support of construction and severance, to avoid or minimize
losses due to currency fluctuations and revaluations.

    E10.1.3. Factors to consider in making decisions regarding foreign currency include the
probability of fluctuations and reevaluations, and the comparative rate of return on foreign
currency holdings as opposed to dollar instruments. U.S. MBFs or other financial institutions
designated by the Treasury Department shall be used to hold currencies when authorized under
host-country law. In the absence of such institutions, funds shall be held in foreign banks as
designated by the Treasury Department.


E10.2. HEDGING

    E10.2.1. Hedging in foreign currencies is authorized at the discretion of the Service
headquarters concerned. Hedges shall be associated directly with underlying foreign exchange
exposures. Hedging may be accomplished through the use of forward contracts and foreign
currency options with a maximum horizon of 1 year for operational requirements and a
maximum horizon of 3 years for construction projects. Writing uncovered (or selling) options is
not authorized. Only the Military Service and joint-Service headquarters central NAFIs may
make hedging transactions in foreign currencies. Hedging techniques shall not violate host-
country laws and government-to-government agreements related to the acquisition and use of
foreign currencies by U.S. Forces.

    E10.2.2. All foreign exchange hedge contracts shall be transacted with authorized
counterparties. The counterparties shall be creditworthy institutions with a short term credit
rating of A-1 (S&P) and P-1 (Moody’s), and a long term credit rating of at least A (S&P) and A
(Moody’s). An ISDA agreement shall be in place with each counterparty. All counterparties
shall be authorized by the Military Service or joint-Service headquarters prior to initiating
hedging activity. Counterparty credit worthiness shall be monitored on at least an annual basis.

   E10.2.3. Each Military Service and joint-Service NAFI engaging in foreign currency
hedging shall implement a detailed written policy that includes the following topics.



Change 1, 03/20/08                             89                       ENCLOSURE 10
                                                            DODI 1015.15, October 31, 2007



               E10.2.3.1. Foreign exchange risk management overview to include purpose or
charter, program objectives, and roles and responsibilities.

               E10.2.3.2. Exposure identification and measurement.

               E10.2.3.3. Foreign exchange hedging strategy and execution to include
authorized foreign exchange hedging instruments and definitions, hedge time horizons and ratio
of exposures, authorized counterparties, market risk analysis, counterparty risk management
requirements, and valuation of foreign exchange derivatives.

                E10.2.3.4. Foreign exchange risk management controls to include authorization
and limits, segregation of duties, internal controls, and accounting.

              E10.2.3.5. Documentation to include Financial Accounting Standard No. 133
(Reference (bn)) and ISDA agreements.

             E10.2.3.6. Performance measurements to include quantitative and qualitative
measures, management reporting, and compliance monitoring.

               E10.2.3.7. Oversight to include a foreign exchange risk management report,
annual policy review, and review during oversight committee meetings.

     E10.2.4. The Annual NAF Treasury Management Report submitted by the DoD
Components to the PDUSD(P&R) in accordance with paragraph E9.9. shall include a report of
all foreign exchange hedging activities to include a list of all contracts outstanding during the
year (counterparty, currencies, exchange rate, notional amounts, contract type, maturity date, and
mark-to-market values) and the short term and long term S&P and Moody’s credit ratings for all
authorized counterparties.




Change 1, 03/20/08                             90                       ENCLOSURE 10
