                                DOD DIRECTIVE 5137.02
        UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR RESEARCH AND
                  ENGINEERING (USD(R&E))

Originating Component:        Office of the Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense

Effective:                    July 15, 2020

Releasability:                Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division Website
                              at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Incorporates and Cancels: See Paragraph 1.2.

Approved by:                  David L. Norquist, Deputy Secretary of Defense


Purpose: Under the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by Sections 113 and of Title 10,
United States Code (U.S.C.), this issuance:
• Establishes the position, responsibilities and functions, relationships, and authorities of the
USD(R&E).
• Authorizes the USD(R&E), as a Principal Staff Assistant (PSA) reporting directly to the Secretary of
Defense, to promulgate DoD policy within the responsibilities, functions, and authorities assigned in this
issuance.
                                                                                                    DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Qualifications Regarding Cancellation. ............................................................................ 3
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS.............................................................................. 4
SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS .......................................................................................................... 12
   3.1. USD(R&E). ..................................................................................................................... 12
   3.2. USD(A&S). ..................................................................................................................... 12
   3.3. Chief Information Officer of the Department of Defense (DoD CIO). .......................... 13
   3.4. USD(P). ........................................................................................................................... 14
   3.5. Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of
       Defense (USD(C)/CFO).................................................................................................... 15
   3.6. Director, Operational Test and Evaluation. .................................................................... 15
   3.7. Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation. ..................................................... 15
   3.8. USD(I&S). ...................................................................................................................... 15
   3.9. USD(P&R). ..................................................................................................................... 16
   3.10. OSD PSAs and DoD Component Heads. ..................................................................... 16
SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES .............................................................................................................. 17
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 21
   G.1. Acronyms. ...................................................................................................................... 21
   G.2. Definitions. ..................................................................................................................... 22
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 24




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                                   DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY.

    a. This issuance applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this
issuance as the “DoD Components”).

    b. Nothing in this issuance should be construed as preventing the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense from fulfilling his or her duties pursuant to Title 5, U.S.C., Appendix,
also known and referred to as “the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended.”


1.2. QUALIFICATIONS REGARDING CANCELLATION.

This issuance incorporates USD(R&E) responsibilities and functions, relationships, and
authorities from the documents enumerated in this Paragraph. The publication of this issuance,
and the simultaneous publication of DoD Directive (DoDD) 5135.02, the inaugural chartering
directive for the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment (USD(A&S)), will
cancel:

   a. DoDD 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
(USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended.

    b. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Implementation Guidance for the
Establishment of the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and
the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” January 31,
2018.

   c. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018.

   d. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Acquisition Roles and Responsibilities,”
December 20, 2019.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                          3
                                                                   DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


               SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS
The USD(R&E) is the PSA and advisor to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense for all
matters regarding the DoD Research and Engineering (R&E) Enterprise, defense R&E,
technology development, technology transition, developmental prototyping, experimentation,
and developmental testing activities and programs, and unifying defense R&E efforts across the
DoD. In the exercise of assigned responsibilities, the USD(R&E):

    a. Serves as the Chief Technology Officer of the DoD with the mission of advancing
technology and innovation. Advises the Secretary of Defense on all matters related to research;
engineering; manufacturing; developmental test and evaluation; and technology development,
innovation, and protection activities and programs in the DoD and occurring internationally.
Establishes priorities across those matters to ensure conformance with Secretary of Defense
policy and guidance.

    b. Provides technical leadership and oversight, establishes strategic priorities, issues
guidance, and acts as the senior responsible official for the supervision of all programs and
activities pertaining to the USD(R&E) whether derived from statute, or assigned at the discretion
of the Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Defense. Ensures alignment of policies and priorities
with Secretary of Defense policy and guidance.

     c. Establishes policies and strategic guidance and leads defense research; engineering;
developmental prototyping and experimentation; technology development, exploitation,
transition, and transfer; developmental test and evaluation; and manufacturing technology
activities, including operation of the DoD Manufacturing Innovation Institutes; and
microelectronics activities across the DoD Components. Initial areas of strategic leadership
include the development or modernization of microelectronics, directed energy, hypersonics,
fifth generation (5G) and next generation wireless networks (5G to next generation), artificial
intelligence (AI)/machine learning, biotechnology, space autonomy, fully networked command,
control, and communications (FNC3), cyber, and quantum science. These areas may change
over time at the discretion of the USD(R&E).

    d. Leads prototyping initiatives to advance innovative or novel technology development,
drive down technical and integration risk, and/or demonstrate new capability. Advises the
USD(A&S) on prototypes that transition to or support acquisition pathways. This includes
establishing Defense Program Planning guidance on the allocation of resources within areas of
the USD(R&E) authorities.

   e. In coordination with other appropriate PSAs and DoD Component heads, leads the
Department’s strategy to address 5G challenges and opportunities.

    f. In coordination with the Secretary, and informed by the National Defense Strategy,
identifies and defines the Department’s modernization priorities. Establishes timelines for
delivery of desired future capabilities, and develops Department-wide roadmaps for research
and engineering investments in these priority areas. Serves as the Department’s primary
representative and spokesperson for the modernization priority areas, both within the
Department and to government, industrial, and academic stakeholders. Coordinates research


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                         4
                                                                   DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


and engineering activities across the Department to recommend investments that advance
the goals and meet the timelines outlined in the modernization roadmaps, and identifies
activities across the Department that run counter to the modernization roadmaps for
potential resource reallocation.

    g. Ensures the DoD technical infrastructure, engineering, and scientific capabilities as well
as associated resources are aligned to the DoD priorities. Establishes the DoD annual strategic
science and technology (S&T) investment strategy, resourced in the research, development, test
and evaluation appropriation under Budget Activity 1-3 accounts; develops and issues policy and
guidance to align the DoD S&T resources to this strategy; and conducts periodic reviews of DoD
Component S&T investments to ensure progress against the DoD S&T goals. Identifies, tracks,
and oversees all Advanced Component Development and Prototypes (Budget Activity 4)
resources in order to ensure effective prototyping and alignment to DoD goals.

    h. Reviews the investment priorities of contractors performing independent research and
development (IR&D) in order to provide visibility and insight into those investments.
Encourages open communication and dialogue regarding IR&D needs, priorities, activities, and
results among IR&D participants and government S&T, research and development, and
acquisition personnel in accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 3204.01. Chairs the Research
and Engineering Executive Committee to improve DoD insight of IR&D activities.

   i. Manages the DoD S&T Enterprise portfolio to address near-term and far-term capability
gaps against emerging threats.

       (1) Develops and publishes an overarching DoD-wide S&T strategy. Leads cross-
Service and agency technology-focused community of interest activities to align and de-
conflict efforts to ensure maximum coverage of DoD capability gaps.

        (2) Advocates for, and provides functional leadership of, DoD laboratory enterprise
and facilities supporting research, development, test, and evaluation. Serves as the DoD
chief steward and advocate for the DoD laboratory infrastructure, personnel, and core
competencies. Assesses the quality and health of DoD laboratories to include independent
reviews.

      (3) Provides strategic direction and leadership for the DoD basic research programs.
Assesses the quality of DoD basic research to include independent technical reviews.
Provides active oversight and final approval of joint basic research programs. Sets goals
and approves final topic selection for the Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative
program.

        (4) Serves as the J-1 Visa Waiver signatory authority for foreign nationals with
research of substantial interest to DoD under the purview of the Office of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (OUSD(R&E)). Before submitting a J-1
Visa Waiver applications to the U.S. Department of State, coordinates with the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) when considering candidates
for relief from the 2-year residency requirement of Section 212(e) of the Immigration and
Nationality Act Public Law ((P.L.) 82-414).


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                       5
                                                                    DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


       (5) Oversees and represents the DoD on all international S&T activities and
coordinates with the USD(A&S) and Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), as
appropriate, on DoD international engagements, to include North Atlantic Treaty
Organization components, allies, and friendly foreign partners. Maintains an international
S&T engagement strategy.

       (6) Establishes partnerships and cooperation agreements, memoranda of agreement,
project agreements, and other international collaboration mechanisms covering areas of
S&T, developmental prototyping, and associated experimentation to ensure continued and
expanded U.S. technical superiority and consistency with statutory and other requirements.
Relevant actions are completed in coordination with the USD(P), as appropriate.

       (7) Develops policies, guidance, and direction for the protection of human subjects
in research, including with regard to adherence to ethical standards: Exercises the
authorities of:

          (a) The Head of the Department identified in Section 219 of Title 32, Code of
Federal Regulations.

           (b) The Secretary of Defense, as identified in Subparts B-D of Section 46, Title
45, Code of Federal Regulations for research described in DoDI 3216.02 and Section 980 of
Title 10, U.S.C.

       (8) Develops policies, guidance, and direction for the protection of animal subjects
in research, including with regard to adherence to ethical standards. Is the DoD point of
contact for all matters related to DoD compliance with the Animal Welfare Act and the
principal DoD liaison with agencies outside the DoD on matters pertaining to animal care
and use for research, development, test, evaluation, education, and training.

    j. In coordination with the USD(I&S) and the USD(A&S), establishes DoD technology
protection policy to establish, align, and implement DoD-wide activities that maintain
technological advantage and mitigate the exploitation of critical programs and technologies by
adversaries.

        (1) Leads the Department in assessment, promotion and development of emerging
technology and the manufacturing innovation base. Assesses potential and emerging threats to
technologies, recommends actions and investments to prevent and combat exploitation of critical
information, missions, programs, and technologies, and to exploit adversary vulnerabilities and
defeat their capabilities.

       (2) Provides expert technological review of matters related to Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States issues in partnership with the USD(A&S).

        (3) Provides technical advice and consultation in support of Defense Technology
Security Administration, as appropriate, regarding export control regulations and license review
policy. Coordinates technology security-related matters with Defense Technology Security
Administration. Coordination includes the prioritization of critical technologies for inclusion in
the Commerce Control List and the U.S. Munitions List and the processing of export license


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                            6
                                                                     DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


applications that may involve programs or technologies requiring protection consistent with
national security objectives.

        (4) In support of the cyber-secure Defense Industrial Base (DIB), performs cyber
incident damage assessments of technical information losses when members of the DIB report an
incident; assesses cybersecurity and supply chain risks of DoD programs; and technologies and
identifies potential mitigations.

       (5) Oversees the DoD Domestic Technology Transfer Program.

      (6) Administers the Manufacturing Technology Program, and manages the Joint Defense
Manufacturing Technology Panel, in accordance with Section 2521 of Title 10, U.S.C.

   k. Oversees, provides strategic direction, and develops policy for the DoD use of Federally
Funded Research and Development Centers and DoD University-Affiliated Research Centers
consistent with law and regulation, and ensures alignment with the National Defense Strategy
and modernization priorities.

    l. Leads the DoD in key innovation efforts through the Small Business Innovation Research
and Small Business Technology Transfer programs to ensure alignment with priorities and
ensure advancement of the goal of increasing private-sector commercialization of innovations
derived from DoD research and development funding.

     m. Establishes pilot initiatives that implement alternative acquisition approaches and
embrace agile practices to innovate, develop, exploit, and facilitate technology transfer to the
DoD. In conjunction with the USD(A&S), identifies, evaluates, and promotes opportunities to
reduce barriers to entry for commercial technologies and non-traditional defense partners. Leads
initiatives to engage non-traditional suppliers of technology. Identifies opportunities to use
existing capabilities in new and unanticipated ways to disrupt the adversary. Transitions
successfully piloted acquisition approaches to the USD(A&S) for potential instantiation into
policy, guidance, oversight, and implementation.

     n. Identifies and oversees cross-cutting demonstration, developmental prototyping and
experimentation activities, evaluation of strategic capability alternatives, and new mission
capabilities for the joint warfighter, while focusing on expediting transition timelines to meet
critical challenges and operational problems.

    o. Advises the Joint Requirements Oversight Council on matters within the USD(R&E)
authority and expertise to inform and influence requirements, concepts, capabilities-based
assessments, and concepts of operation.

    p. Advises the Warfighter Senior Integration Group, providing insights into technical risk,
and recommends if potential prototypes or emerging technologies might contribute to meeting
Joint Urgent Operational Needs, Joint Emergent Operational Needs, Warfighter Senior
Integration Group-identified urgent issues, or Rapid Acquisition Authority actions.

   q. In coordination with key stakeholders, develops governing policy and advances practices
and workforce competency for the following technical activities: engineering, developmental


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                          7
                                                                     DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


test and evaluation, reliability and maintainability, manufacturability, quality, system safety,
human systems integration, modular open systems approach, resilient systems, software
development, hardware and software assurance, system security engineering, , modeling and
simulation, and digital engineering.

    r. Develops developmental test and evaluation policy, and approves the developmental test
and evaluation plans within Test and Evaluation Master Plans for those programs identified for
direct oversight, in accordance with current DoD Test and Evaluation acquisition policies.
Ensures appropriate test facilities, test ranges, tools, and related modeling and simulation
capabilities are maintained within the DoD.

    s. Leads the DoD, in coordination with the USD(A&S), in mission engineering policy,
practices, and tools for analysis of warfighting concepts of operation, functions, systems, and
technologies in an end-to-end mission context. Identifies capability and technology gaps to
provide mission-based solutions to the requirements process and system-of-systems portfolio
management, and inform investments in development of technologies, prototypes, testing, and
design options. Aligns joint prototyping and experimentation and red-teaming activities to
improve integrated mission performance.

   t. Advises the USD(A&S) regarding materiel development decisions, milestone decisions,
production decisions, and technology insertion strategies on Acquisition Category (ACAT) ID
programs.

         (1) Conducts assessments of technology, engineering, integration, and manufacturing
risks.

        (2) For Milestone B and C, provides an assessment of the sufficiency of developmental
test and evaluation plans, including the use of automated data analytics or modeling and
simulation tools and methodologies.

        (3) Participates in major defense acquisition programs (MDAPs) Configuration Steering
Boards, and Defense Acquisition Boards throughout the program lifecycle to advise on technical
risk and impacts to cost, schedule, and performance.

       (4) Prepares the post-Preliminary Design Review assessment prior to Milestone B to
support the USD(A&S) determinations, in accordance with Section 2366b of Title 10, U.S.C.

    u. Establishes policy (with the exception of Middle Tier of Acquisition prototyping) and
exercises oversight authority over all DoD uses of developmental prototyping. This includes
technology prototypes, such as breadboards and presentation prototypes, the intent of which is to
drive down technical and integration risk and demonstrate a technical capability, to include
manufacturability.

   v. Establishes requirements for standardized sets of technical data to facilitate assessment
and transparency, and to enable the advisory functions under purview of the USD(R&E).

   w. Establishes policies for development and approval of systems engineering plans and
program protection plans.


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                          8
                                                                   DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


   x. Establishes policy and coordinates Service implementation of policy relating to Modular
Open Systems Approach, to include the specification, identification, development, and
maintenance of major system interfaces and standards for use in major system platforms to
enable incremental development and enhance competition, innovation, and interoperability.

   y. Establishes policy and guidance for the conduct of Independent Technical Risk
Assessments (ITRAs), consistent with Section 2448b of Title 10, U.S.C. Conducts and approves
ITRAs for ACAT ID programs.

       (1) Determines ITRA approval authority for ACAT IB/IC programs.

       (2) Provides recurring review to DoD leadership of ITRAs, developmental test and
evaluation sufficiency assessments, and Service disposition of recommendations.

    z. In coordination with the USD(I&S) and other senior officials, where appropriate, supports
MDAPs and other acquisition programs in the areas within which the USD(R&E) has direct or
shared mission equities, including:

       (1) Assured software and hardware.

       (2) Program and technology protection.

       (3) Technical information and data protection.

       (4) Technology vulnerability and exploitation mitigation and assurance.

       (5) Anti-tamper, reliability, maintainability, and supply chain risk management.

       (6) Cyber security and resiliency.

       (7) Program protection planning.

       (8) Conduct of program and technology assessments, system engineering, technical risk,
joint mission engineering, joint architectures, prototyping and experimentation outcomes, and
technology-related recommendations.

   aa. Chairs the Missile Defense Executive Board, pursuant to Section 1676(c)(3)(B) of P.L.
115-91.

    ab. Develops and implements a space S&T strategy, jointly with the Director of National
Intelligence and consistent with Section 2272 of Title 10, U.S.C.

    ac. Establishes policies and procedures, in coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)) and the USD(A&S), for the effective management of
the R&E workforce in the DoD.

        (1) Leads activities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields and
disciplines necessary to meet the national defense needs, pursuant to Sections 2191-2199 of Title



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                       9
                                                                     DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


10, U.S.C. Administers the Science, Mathematics, and Research for Transformation Program, in
accordance with Section 2192(a) of Title 10, U.S.C., and DoDI 1025.09.

        (2) Approves, pursuant to paragraph 4.r of this Directive, personnel demonstration
projects at all of the DoD Science and Technology Reinvention Laboratories.

   ad. Sponsors the Defense Science Board and the Defense Innovation Board.

    ae. Develops and implements DoD Grants and Agreement Regulatory System (DGARS)
policies and procedures through the issuance of the DGARS and, as necessary, DoDIs and other
issuances. Provides oversight to the systems, as required under DGARS, for the management of
DoD assistance awards. The USD(R&E) will coordinate changes to DGARS with the
Secretaries of the Military Departments and other appropriate PSAs and DoD Component Heads.

    af. Manages the Defense Standardization Program to promote standardization of materiel,
information technology, facilities, and engineering practices.

    ag. Advises the Secretary of Defense on matters regarding technologies for the utilization of
energy and exercises all responsibilities and authorities of the Secretary of Defense as they
pertain to R&E, in accordance with Sections 2924-2926 of Title 10, U.S.C. In concert with the
USD(A&S) and the CJCS, exercises all responsibilities and authorities of the Secretary of
Defense in Sections 2924-2926 of Title 10, U.S.C.

   ah. Serves as the DoD senior accountable official for value engineering, pursuant to Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-131.

   ai. Establishes partnerships with industry associations to develop commercial or non-
government standards to replace military specifications and standards, where practicable,
consistent with Section 2305 of Title 10 U.S.C. note.

    aj. Serves as the Principal Disclosure Authority for classified military information originated
by USD(R&E). Exercises foreign disclosure authority over classified military information
originated by USD(R&E)-funded programs and activities, in accordance with DoDD 5230.11.

     (1) Serves as USD(R&E) on the National Military Information Disclosure Policy
   Committee.

         (2) Applies foreign disclosure policies and procedures as required by DoDD 5230.11 to
facilitate sharing of classified military information originated by USD(R&E)-funded programs
and activities in support of international cooperation, foreign military sales, or direct commercial
sales programs or other international engagement activities.

    ak. Participates in, or designates a representative for, the councils, boards, working groups,
or other similar forums for which the USD(R&E) is directed to participate as a member. Such
direction may take the form of statutory, regulatory, or Secretarial discretionary instruction.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                         10
                                                                    DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


    al. Provides policy and guidance relevant to activities within the purview of the USD(R&E),
in coordination with the USD(I&S) and the USD(A&S), regarding contractor access to classified
information.

   am. Coordinates with the USD(I&S) and the USD(A&S) on information sharing policy and
implementation of Controlled Unclassified Information with the DoD R&E Enterprise and the
public.

    an. Ensures Special Access Program (SAP) oversight by establishing an OUSD(R&E) SAP
Central Office and designating a OUSD(R&E) SAP Central Office Director to be responsible for
executing the responsibilities outlined in DoDD 5205.07. Exercises cognizance and oversight of
designated DoD SAPs and personnel granted access to these programs.

  ao. In coordination with the USD(P) and USD(I&S), manages and oversees DoD Alternative
Compensatory Control Measures, consistent with Volume 3 of DoD Manual 5200.01.

    ap. Ensures that assigned policies and programs are designed and managed to improve
standards of performance, ethics, economy, and efficiency and that all of the Defense Agencies
and DoD Field Activities under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(R&E) are
attentive and responsive to the requirements of their organizational customers, both internal and
external to DoD.

   aq. Periodically assesses the DoD Executive Agent assignments under the cognizance of the
USD(R&E) for continued need, currency, and effectiveness and efficiency in satisfying end-user
requirements, in accordance with DoDD 5101.01.

   ar. Uses existing systems, facilities, and services of DoD and other federal departments and
agencies, when possible, to avoid duplication and achieve maximum efficiency and economy.

   as. Performs such other duties as the Secretary of Defense may prescribe.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                       11
                                                                  DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


                            SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS

3.1. USD(R&E).

In performing his or her assigned responsibilities and functions, the USD(R&E):

   a. Reports directly to the Secretary of Defense.

   b. Exercises authority, direction, and control over:

       (1) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for R&E.

       (2) The Director, Defense R&E for Advanced Capabilities.

       (3) The Director, Defense R&E for Modernization.

       (4) The Director, Defense R&E for Research and Technology.

       (5) The Director, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

       (6) The Director, Missile Defense Agency.

       (7) The Director, Space Development Agency.

       (8) The Director, Defense Innovation Unit.

       (9) The Director, Defense Microelectronics Activity.

       (10) The Administrator, Defense Technical Information Center.

       (11) The Director, Test Resource Management Center.

        (12) Such other positions and organizations as may be established by the USD(R&E),
consistent with applicable law, using resources provided by the Secretary of Defense.

   c. Coordinates and exchanges information with the other OSD officials, DoD Component
heads, and federal, State, or local officials having collateral or related functions.


3.2. USD(A&S).

The USD(A&S) coordinates with the USD(R&E) to:

    a. Ensure that developmental technologies are successfully transferred for acquisition, in
accordance with the efforts, strategies, and requirements of the USD(R&E), in support of the
interests of the Secretary, the needs of the Combatant Commanders, and the mission of the DoD.




SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS                                                                     12
                                                                     DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


    b. Support the establishment of programs and development of capabilities to foster priority
technologies and joint mission engineering.

   c. Ensure:

       (1) The seamless functioning of acquisition program governance where both officials
have equities, such as the USD(R&E) responsibility for the completion of ITRAs.

      (2) The effective consideration of sustainment factors and system attributes early in the
weapon system design in accordance with Section 2443 of Title 10 U.S.C.

       (3) Appropriate engineering processes are being implemented, among others.

    d. Jointly support the successful achievement of both officials’ responsibilities, especially in
regard to:

       (1) The promotion of rapid and innovative acquisition processes.

       (2) Maintenance of U.S. technological advantages over adversaries.

       (3) The efficiency and effectiveness of the overall systems development and acquisition
process from technology evaluation through acquisition, operation, maintenance, retirement, and
replacement.

    e. Support efforts in those areas in which equities are shared, or closely adjacent, such as
international agreements for technology advancement and industrial base policy, fostering of
innovation, preservation of the industrial base, and management.

   f. Ensure that efforts to identify and rectify capability gaps are communicated and
coordinated, especially when addressing matters affecting multiple DoD Components.

   g. Support the cyber-secure DIB.


3.3. CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (DOD
CIO).

    a. The DoD CIO coordinates with the USD(R&E) on Information Technology, information
resource, and data management matters, in accordance with applicable DoD Information
Technology policy and law.

    b. In the area of FNC3 and cyber, the responsibilities for policy, oversight, and guidance for
the architecture and programs related to FNC3 and cyber defense architecture of the DoD, as
required by Section 902 in Public Law 114-328, resides with the DoD CIO. The authority over
research and development of FNC3 and cyberspace capabilities resides with the USD(R&E).
The USD(R&E) provides the underpinning research, technology development, and technical
advice to the DoD CIO and the Commander, U.S. Cyber Command in the areas of
operationalizing command and control; communications; networking; AI; positioning,



SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS                                                                           13
                                                                     DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


navigation, and timing (PNT) alternatives; and electromagnetic spectrum management to better
inform DoD policies.

    c. Within the area of AI and Machine Learning, the USD(R&E) oversees research and
development activities. USD(R&E) will coordinate with CIO on transitioning AI R&E products
to the warfighter.

    d. Coordinates with the USD(R&E) on electromagnetic spectrum allocation, planning, and
use to facilitate research, development, test, and engineering activities including next generation
communications development and employment, space technology development, and test facility
infrastructure modernization.

   e. Coordinates with the USD(R&E) to:

       (1) Incorporate cybersecurity and cyber risk management into the research and
engineering of information technology (IT) solutions and IT initiatives within the DoD.

        (2) Develop, maintain, and manage the implementation of a sound, secure, and
integrated DoD IT architecture.

       (3) Ensure the interoperability of IT throughout the DoD.

       (4) Prescribe IT standards, including network and cybersecurity standards that apply
throughout the DoD and the DIB.

       (5) Support the USD(R&E) on all IT and cyber infrastructure matters and investment
decisions, including IT-intensive software systems.

      (6) Develop and maintain a process for maximizing the value of, and assessing and
managing the risks related to, DoD IT acquisitions.

        (7) Ensure that guidance for PNT and navigation warfare is incorporated into research
and development programs for systems that produce or use PNT information, and to ensure that
test and evaluation plans for these programs are sufficient to validate platform or system
navigation warfare compliance.


3.4. USD(P).

The USD(P):

    a. Coordinates with the USD(R&E) in regards to those programs for which the USD(P) has
authority over policy, outcomes, or interface with external stakeholders, but where execution is
managed through those components under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(R&E)
or where operational guidance is predominantly provided by the USD(R&E) due to the mission
or nature of the program.




SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS                                                                         14
                                                                    DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


    b. Consults with the USD(A&S) and the USD(R&E) in establishing and managing USD(P)
cooperative research and development programs in order to promote mutually beneficial
international cooperative research and development programs consistent with national security
considerations and, as appropriate, to ensure that acquisition aspects of export control policies
and procedures necessary to protect the national security interests of the United States are
technologically sound.


3.5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO).

The USD(C)/CFO:

    a. Coordinates with the USD(R&E) regarding the adequacy of the President’s Budget
Request in meeting DoD R&E resource goals, objectives, and allocation of resources.
Coordinates with the USD(R&E) in regards to the identification of reprogramming and
reallocation actions required to achieve the desired results.

   b. Coordinates with the USD(R&E) before approving the transfer or reprogramming of
funds into or from a program or activity under the responsibilities of the USD(R&E).


3.6. DIRECTOR, OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION.

The Director, Operational Test and Evaluation submits reports of operational and live fire tests
and evaluations carried out to the USD(A&S) and the USD(R&E), and other senior officials as
needed, in accordance with Sections 2366 and 2399 of Title 10, U.S.C.


3.7. DIRECTOR, COST ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAM EVALUATION.

The Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation:

    a. Coordinates with the USD(R&E), the USD(A&S), and the USD(I&S) in fulfilling the
Director’s role as the principal official responsible for assessments of SAP and compartmented
intelligence programs, consistent with Section 139a of Title 10, U.S.C.

    b. Receives advice from the USD(R&E) during the preparation of analysis of alternatives
study guidance.


3.8. USD(I&S).

The USD(I&S):

    a. Coordinates with the USD(R&E), USD(A&S), and other elements of the DoD and the
Intelligence Community regarding development of algorithm-based technology initiatives
affecting intelligence mission areas within the Defense Intelligence Enterprise.



SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS                                                                           15
                                                                    DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


    b. Coordinates all policies related to sharing of Controlled Unclassified Information, or use
of such information in a secure environment, with the USD(R&E) and the USD(A&S).

    c. Coordinates with the USD(R&E), the USD(A&S), and the Director, CAPE, in
assessments of SAP and compartmented intelligence programs, consistent with Section 139a of
Title 10, U.S.C.


3.9. USD(P&R).

The USD(P&R):

   a. Coordinates on the inclusion of training considerations throughout the acquisition process
ensuring concurrent development and sustainment of training capabilities with systems.

   b. Coordinates actions or activities that may affect the training capabilities of major defense
acquisition programs and major automated information systems.

    c. Coordinates policy holding DoD labs, researchers, and developers responsible for
ensuring that embedded training concepts are properly considered during research, engineering,
prototyping, testing, and evaluation.


3.10. OSD PSAS AND DOD COMPONENT HEADS.

The OSD PSAs and DoD Component heads coordinate with the USD(R&E) on matters under
their purview related to the responsibilities, functions, and authorities assigned to the USD(R&E)
in this issuance.




SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS                                                                        16
                                                                   DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


                              SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to his or her authority,
direction, and control, and in accordance with DoD policies and issuances, the USD(R&E) is
hereby delegated authority to exercise, within assigned responsibilities and functions, all
authority of the Secretary of Defense derived from statute, Executive order (E.O.), or interagency
agreement, except where specifically limited by statute or Executive order to the Secretary of
Defense. The USD(R&E) is specifically delegated authority to:

    a. Establish DoD policy, through DoDIs, Directive-type Memorandums (DTMs), and rules
published in the Federal Register, within the authorities and responsibilities assigned in this
issuance and in accordance with DoDI 5025.01 or Administrative Instruction 102.

        (1) In those documents, assign responsibilities related to the authorities and
responsibilities in this issuance to other OSD PSAs and the DoD Component heads. Assignment
of responsibilities in DoD issuances or rules published in the Federal Register publications to
Military Department officials must be made through the Secretaries of those Departments. DoD
issuances or rules published in the Federal Register assigning responsibilities to the Combatant
Commands must be coordinated with the CJCS.

       (2) DoDIs and DTMs must be fully coordinated, in accordance with DoDI 5025.01.
Rules published in the Federal Register must be fully coordinated with impacted OSD and DoD
Component heads and be consistent with Administrative Instruction 102.

       (3) This authority may not be redelegated.

   b. Approve other DoDIs, DoD manuals, and DTMs, in areas of assigned responsibilities and
functions, that implement policy already established by a DoDD, DoDI, DTM, or policy
memorandum issued by the Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Defense.

        (1) In those documents, assign responsibilities related to the authorities and
responsibilities in this issuance to other OSD PSAs and the DoD Component heads. Assignment
of responsibilities in these DoD issuances to Military Department officials must be made through
the Secretaries of those Departments. DoD issuances assigning responsibilities to the Combatant
Commands must be coordinated with the CJCS.

       (2) Such documents must be fully coordinated in accordance with DoDI 5025.01.

       (3) This authority may only be further delegated to officials as specified in DoDI
5025.01.

   c. Approve Federal Register publication of significant guidance documents as defined in
E.O. 13891 and determined by the OMB. This authority may not be redelegated.

   d. Approve the Federal Register publication of documents other than rules and significant
guidance documents (e.g., notices, orders, and non-significant guidance documents as defined by
E.O. 13891 and determined by the OMB), in accordance with Administrative Instruction 102.
Unless otherwise restricted by law, this authority may be further delegated only in writing to


SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                         17
                                                                    DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


officials at or above the level of a general or flag officer, Senior Executive Service member, or
equivalent.

    e. Reissue, when necessary, in accordance with DoDI 5025.01, Chartering DoDDs for those
OSD officials who were appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate
and who are under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(R&E). This authority may
not be redelegated. The Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense continues to
develop and maintain these Chartering DoDDs, in accordance with DoDI 5025.01.

    f. Communicate directly with the DoD Component heads, as necessary, to carry out assigned
responsibilities and functions, including transmitting requests for advice and assistance.
Communications to Military Department officials must be transmitted through the Secretaries of
the Military Departments or as otherwise provided in law or directed by the Secretary of Defense
in other DoD issuances. Communications to the Combatant Commanders must be in accordance
with DoDD 5100.01.

    g. Communicate with other government officials, members of the public, and representatives
of foreign governments, as appropriate, in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions.
Communications with representatives and members of the Legislative Branch must be conducted
through the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs, except for
communications with the Defense Appropriations Committees, which must be coordinated with
the Office of the USD(C)/CFO.

   h. Communicate with departments and agencies of the Executive Branch, and Congress on
SAP matters under USD(R&E) cognizance or oversight. For all SAP matters, the USD(R&E)
must conduct communications with departments and agencies of the Executive Branch and
Congress, in accordance with DoDD 5205.07.

    i. Obtain reports and information, in accordance with DoDI 8910.01, as necessary, to carry
out assigned responsibilities and functions.

   j. Establish arrangements for DoD participation in non-DoD governmental programs for
which the USD(R&E) is assigned primary DoD cognizance.

    k. Enter into support agreements, as required for the effective performance of
responsibilities and functions assigned to the USD(A&S), in accordance with DoDI 4000.19 and
the February 13, 2020 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum.

   l. Serve as the Secretary’s R&E interface in appointed duties with other federal government
agencies, including the:

       (1) U.S. Departments of State, Commerce, Justice, Energy, Homeland Security, and
Treasury.

       (2) The Intelligence Community.

       (3) The Federal Aviation Administration.



SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                              18
                                                                   DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


       (4) The Federal Communications Commission.

       (5) The National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

       (6) General Services Administration.

       (7) The National Science Foundation.

       (8) Foreign governments.

       (9) International organizations.

       (10) State, local, and tribal agencies.

       (11) The U.S. Congress.

       (12) The White House, to include the National Security Council, National Science and
Technology Council, National Space Council, OMB, Office of S&T Policy, Council on
Oversight of the DoD PNT Enterprise, and Semiconductor Technology Council.

    m. Exercise up to Top Secret original classification authority as delegated by the Secretary
of Defense, in accordance with E.O. 13526 and DoDI 5200.01.

    n. Exercise advisory authority with regard to MDAPs consistent with USD(R&E) roles and
responsibilities.

   o. Approve the use of other transaction agreements for:

       (1) Research (to include technology investment agreements), in accordance with Section
2371 of Title 10, U.S.C.

       (2) Prototyping, in accordance with Section 2371b of Title 10, U.S.C.

    p. In accordance with the duties and powers under Section 133b of Title 10, U.S.C. and
consistent with P.L. 85-804 and E.O. 10789, in addition to the Secretary of Defense and the
Secretaries of the Military Departments, the USD(R&E) may exercise authority to indemnify
against unusually hazardous or nuclear risks, as appropriate, in carrying out the USD(R&E)'s
assigned responsibilities and functions.

    q. In accordance with Chapter 111 of Title 10, U.S.C., exercise all authorities and
responsibilities of the Secretary of Defense relating to support of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics education and training. In accordance with Section 2192(c) of
Title 10, U.S.C., the USD(R&E) is designated to advise and assist the Secretary of Defense
regarding matters relating to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education and
training.

   r. Carry out personnel demonstration projects, in accordance with Section 342 of P.L. 103-
337, and pursuant to Section 4703 of Title 5, U.S.C., with specified exceptions. Exercise the



SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                          19
                                                                   DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


authorities granted to the Office of Personnel Management, pursuant to Section 4703 of Title 5,
U.S.C..

    s. Carry out programs, as appropriate, to award cash prizes for advanced technology
achievements to recognize outstanding achievements in basic, applied and advanced research,
technology development, and prototype development that have the potential for application to
the performance of the military missions of the DoD, pursuant to Section 2374a of Title 10,
U.S.C.

    t. Carry out the Defense Acquisition Challenge Program to provide opportunities for the
increased introduction of innovative and cost-saving technology in acquisition programs of the
DoD, in accordance with Section 2359 of Title 10, U.S.C.

    u. Make written determinations for conduct of all closed meetings of Federal Advisory
Committees under his or her cognizance, as prescribed by Appendix II, Section 10(d) of Title 5
of P.L. 92-463.

    v. Exercise all powers conferred upon the Secretary of Defense under Sections 181, 182, and
184 of Title 35, U.S.C., with respect to the secrecy of certain inventions and the withholding of
patents.




SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                           20
                                                         DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


                             GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

ACRONYM          MEANING
5G               fifth generation

ACAT             Acquisition Category
AI               artificial intelligence

CJCS             Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DDR&E            Director, Defense Research and Engineering
DGARS            DoD Grants and Agreement Regulatory System
DIB              Defense Industrial Base
DoD CIO          Chief Information Officer of the Department of Defense
DoDD             DoD directive
DoDI             DoD instruction
DTM              directive-type memorandum

E.O.             Executive order

FNC3             Fully Networked Command, Control, and Communications

IR&D             independent research and development
IT               information technology
ITRA             Independent Technical Risk Assessment

MDA              Milestone Decision Authority
MDAP             major defense acquisition program

OMB              Office of Management and Budget
OUSD(R&E)        Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and
                 Engineering

P.L.             Public Law
PNT              positioning, navigation, and timing
PSA              Principal Staff Assistant

R&E              Research and Engineering

SAP              Special Access Program
S&T              science and technology

U.S.C.           United States Code
USD(A&S)         Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment


GLOSSARY                                                                         21
                                                                     DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


 USD(C)/CFO                  Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                             Department of Defense
 USD(I&S)                    Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
 USD(P)                      Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
 USD(P&R)                    Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
 USD(R&E)                    Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering


G.2. DEFINITIONS.

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

 TERM                      DEFINITION

 ACAT                      Categories established to facilitate decentralized decision making and
                           execution and compliance with statutorily imposed requirements.
                           The categories determine the level of review, decision authority, and
                           applicable procedures. ACAT categories include: ACAT I (including
                           IB, IC, and ID), ACAT II, ACAT III, ACAT IV (Navy and Marine
                           Corps only), and Abbreviated Acquisition Program (Navy and
                           Marine Corps only).

 DoD R&E Enterprise Includes the Military Departments and their laboratories, other DoD
                    laboratories and product centers, other federal government
                    laboratories, Federally Funded Research and Development Centers,
                    University Affiliated Research Centers, U.S. and allied universities,
                    U.S. allied and partner government laboratories, and industry.

 MDAP                      An acquisition program within the meaning of Section 2430 of Title
                           10, U.S.C.


 MDA                       Designated individual with overall responsibility for a program. The
                           MDA will have the authority to approve entry of an acquisition
                           program into the next phase of the acquisition process and will be
                           accountable for cost, schedule, and performance reporting to higher
                           authority, including Congressional reporting.

 other OSD officials       The OSD Component heads who also serve as PSAs, and the other
                           OSD Presidentially Appointed, Senate-confirmed officials.

 R&E                       Includes S&T programs, advanced component development and
                           prototypes programs (Budget Activity 4 in DoD 7000.14R), and all
                           programs executed at Defense laboratories.




GLOSSARY                                                                                        22
                                                   DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


TERM       DEFINITION

S&T        Includes programs consisting of basic research, applied research, and
           advanced technology development, which are identified as Budget
           Activities 1, 2, and 3, respectively, in DoD 7000.14R.




GLOSSARY                                                                       23
                                                                 DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


                                      REFERENCES

Administrative Instruction 102, “Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) Federal Register (FR)
   System,” November 6, 2006, as amended
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 32, Part 219
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, Part 46, Subparts B-D
Defense Innovation Board Charter, April 15, 2016, as amended
Defense Science Board Charter, May 6, 2018
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegation of Authority for OSD Component
   Heads to Enter into Support Agreements,” February 13, 2020
Acting Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Memorandum,
   “Science, Technology, Mathematics, and Engineering Education Delegation of Authority to
   Director, Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E),” October 12, 2010 (hereby
   canceled)
DoD 7000.14-R, Volume 2B, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation:
   Budget Formulation and Presentation”, current edition
DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major Components,”
   December 21, 2010
DoD Directive 5101.01, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
DoD Directive 5135.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment (A&S),”
   July 15, 2020
DoD Directive 5205.07, “Special Access Program (SAP) Policy,” July 1, 2010, as amended
DoD Directive 5230.11, “Disclosure of Classified Military Information to Foreign Governments
   and International Organizations,” June 16, 1992
DoD Instruction 1025.09, “Science, Mathematics, and Research for Transformation (SMART)
   Defense Education Program,” October 27, 2016, as amended
DoD Instruction 3204.01, “DoD Policy for Oversight of Independent Research and Development
   (IR&D),” August 20, 2014, as amended
DoD Instruction 3216.02, “Protection of Human Subjects and Adherence to Ethical Standards in
   DoD-Supported Research,” November 8, 2011, as amended
DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” April 25, 2013, as amended
DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended
DoD Instruction 5200.01, “DoD Information Security Program and Protection of Sensitive
   Compartmented Information (SCI),” April 21, 2016, as amended
DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,” May 19, 2014
DoD Manual 5200.01, Volume 3, “DoD Information Security Program: Protection of Classified
   Information,” February 24, 2012, as amended
Executive Order 10789, “Authorizing Agencies of the Government to Exercise Certain
   Contracting Authority in Connection with National Defense Functions and Prescribing
   Regulations Governing the Exercise of Such Authority,” November 14, 1958



REFERENCES                                                                                  24
                                                                DoDD 5137.02, July 15, 2020


Executive Order 13526, “Classified National Security Information,” December 29, 2009
Executive Order 13891, “Promoting the Rule of Law through Improved Agency Guidance
   Documents,” October 9, 2019
Office of Management and Budget Circular A-131, “Value Engineering,” May 21, 1993, as
   amended
Public Law 103-337, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1995,” October 5,
   1994
Public Law 114-328, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017,” December 23,
   2016
Public Law 115-91, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018,” December 12,
   2017
Public Law 92-463, “Federal Advisory Committee Act,” October 6, 1972
Public Law 85-804, “An act to authorize the making, amendment, and modification of contracts
   to facilitate the national defense,” August 28, 1958
Public Law 82-414, “An Act to revise the laws relating to immigration, naturalization, and
   nationality,” June 27, 1952
United States Code, Title 10
United States Code, Title 35
United States Code, Title 5




REFERENCES                                                                                25
