                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION
                                                                             NUMBER 1322.22
                                                                             September 24, 2015
                                                       Incorporating Change 1, November 1, 2023

                                                                                        USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Military Service Academies

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02 (Reference
(a)), this instruction:

    a. Reissues DoDD 1322.22 (Reference (b)) as a DoD Instruction (DoDI) to establish policy,
assign responsibilities, and prescribe procedures for DoD oversight of the Military Service
academies (MSAs, also referred to in this instruction as “the academies”).

    b. Incorporates and cancels DoDD 1332.23 (Reference (c)); DoDI 1025.4 (Reference (d));
Directive-type Memorandum 07-022 (Reference (e)); and the June 30, 2018 Assistant Secretary
of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs Memorandum (Reference (f)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy, pursuant to chapters 753, 853, and 953 of Title 10, United States
Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (g)), and consistent with this instruction, that:

    a. The academies provide, each year, newly commissioned officers to each Service that have
been immersed in the history, traditions, and professional values of the Military Services and
developed to be leaders of character, dedicated to a career of professional excellence in service to
the Nation.

     b. The accession of those officers generates a core group of innovative leaders capable of
thinking critically who will exert positive peer influence to convey and sustain these traditions,
attitudes, values, and beliefs essential to the long-term readiness and success of the Military
Services.
                                                              DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


   c. Active duty service is the primary means of reimbursement for education.

     d. Cadets and midshipmen disenrolling or those disenrolled after the beginning of the third
academic year from a Service academy normally will be called to active duty in enlisted status, if
fit for service.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division
Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance:

   a. Provide guidance on how to include the option to maintain parental rights of cadets and
midshipmen who become biological parents while attending the Service academies in
accordance with section 559A(a) of Public Law 117-81 (Reference (h)).

   b. Amend and adds language to reflect a change in accepted dependency criteria.

   c. Updates the title, organizational symbols, and references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective September 24, 2015.




Change 1, 11/01/2023                        2
                                                     DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   4. Applicant Briefing Item on Separation Policy
Glossary




Change 1, 11/01/2023                      3
                                                                                             DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES .................................................................................................. 5

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES ........................................................................................ 7

     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
        (USD(P&R)) ....................................................................................................................... 7
     ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
        (ASD(M&RA)) ................................................................................................................... 7
     ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS ................................ 7
     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)) ........................................... 7
     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL
        OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO) ............................................. 8
     DIRECTOR, DEFENSE FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING SERVICE (DFAS) .................... 8
     IG DoD...................................................................................................................................... 8
     SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS....................................................... 8

ENCLOSURE 3: PROCEDURES ............................................................................................... 10

     ACADEMIES ......................................................................................................................... 10
     ORGANIZATION OF THE ACADEMIES ........................................................................... 10
     NOMINATION AND APPOINTMENT OF CADETS AND MIDSHIPMEN ..................... 11
     CADET AND MIDSHIPMEN FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES ......................................... 12
     DEVELOPMENT OF CADETS AND MIDSHIPMEN ........................................................ 14
     MANAGEMENT OF CADETS AND MIDSHIPMEN ......................................................... 15
     GRADUATION AND COMMISSION .................................................................................. 20
     ACADEMY PREPARATORY SCHOOLS ........................................................................... 22
     REVIEW AND OVERSIGHT................................................................................................ 23
     INTER-SERVICE COMMISSIONING ................................................................................. 24

ENCLOSURE 4: APPLICANT BRIEFING ITEM ON SEPARATION POLICY .................... 25

     INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY ........................................................................................ 25
     HAZING, HARASSMENT, OR VIOLENCE NOT TOLERATED ...................................... 25

GLOSSARY ................................................................................................................................. 27

     PART I: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ............................................................... 27
     PART II: DEFINITIONS....................................................................................................... 27




Change 1, 11/01/2023
                                                                        4
                                                            DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b)   DoD Directive 1322.22, “Service Academies,” August 24, 1994, as amended (hereby
      cancelled)
(c)   DoD Directive 1332.23, “Service Academy Disenrollment,” February 19, 1988, as
      amended (hereby cancelled)
(d)   DoD Instruction 1025.4, “Service Academy Resources Report,” October 18, 1994 (hereby
      cancelled)
(e)   Directive Type Memorandum 07-022, “Policy for Academy and ROTC Graduates Seeking
      to Participate in Professional Sports Before Completion of their Active Duty Service
      Obligation (ASDO),” August 20, 2007 (hereby cancelled)
(f)   Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs Memorandum, “Military
      Service Academy Preparatory School Attendance – Clarifying Direction,” June 30, 2017
(g)   Title 10, United States Code
(h)   Public Law 117-81, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022,”
      December 27, 2021
(i)   DoD Instruction 6130.03, “Medical Standards for Military Service,” date varies by volume
(j)   DoD Directive 5106.01, “Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD),”
      April 20, 2012, as amended
(k)   Chapter 4 of Title 5, United States Code (also known as the “Inspector General Act of
      1978,” as amended)
(l)   DoD Instruction 5400.11, “DoD Privacy and Civil Liberties Programs,” January 29, 2019,
      as amended
(m)   DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(n)   DoD Instruction 1000.30, “Reduction of Social Security Number (SSN) Use Within DoD,”
      August 1, 2012, as amended
(o)   DoD Manual 6025.18, “Implementation of the Health Insurance Portability and
      Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule in DoD Health Care Programs,”
      March 13, 2019
(p)   DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation,” dates vary
      by volume
(q)   DoD Instruction 5010.40, “Managers’ Internal Control Program Procedures,”
      May 30, 2013, as amended
(r)   Title 37, United States Code
(s)   DoD Instruction 6485.01, “Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) in Military Service
      Members,” June 7, 2013, as amended
(t)   DoD Instruction 1010.16, Technical Procedures for the Military Personnel Drug Abuse
      Testing Program,” June 15, 2020
(u)   DoD Instruction 1304.25, “Fulfilling the Military Service Obligation,” October 13, 2021
(v)   Title 11, United States Code



Change 1, 11/01/2023                                                        ENCLOSURE 1
                                               5
                                                          DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


(w) DoD Instruction 1235.12, “Assessing the Reserve Components (RC),” June 7, 2016, as
    amended
(x) DoD Instruction 1332.14, “Enlisted Administrative Separations,” January 27, 2014, as
    amended
(y) DoD Instruction 1342.19, “Family Care Plans,” May 7, 2010, as amended




Change 1, 11/01/2023                                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                             6
                                                             DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


                                       ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R):

   a. Serves as the DoD focal point for matters affecting the academies.

   b. Provides DoD oversight and management of the academies.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
(ASD(M&RA)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), the
ASD(M&RA):

    a. Serves as the Office of the USD(P&R) focal point for matters affecting the academies and
resolves matters of conflict that may arise among the Military Departments.

    b. Assesses and monitors academy operations to ensure cost-effective employment of
resources in the accomplishment of the academies’ mission.

   c. Develops policy and provides guidance for DoD oversight and management of the
academies.

    d. Develops overall DoD policy and provides guidance for the conduct and administration of
a uniform academy disenrollment policy.

   e. Approves or disapproves requests to exceed the foreign student limitation from a single
country provision in section 4(b) of Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

    f. Approves or disapproves requests to release a cadet or midshipman prior to the completion
of 2 years of active service.


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS. Under the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(P&R), the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs
establishes medical standards for applicants to the academies, which are applied through the
DoD Medical Examination Review Board, according to DoDI 6130.03 (Reference (i)).


4. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P):

   a. Oversees the management of admission vacancies for foreign students.



Change 1, 11/01/2023                           7
                                                                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


   b. Designates countries from which foreign students may be selected.

    c. Issues implementing guidance as necessary, including waiver of tuition or fees
reimbursement either wholly or partially for management of admission vacancies for foreign
students.


5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). The USD(C)/CFO establishes and publishes
the tuition rate for foreign students.


6. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING SERVICE (DFAS). Under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(C)/CFO and with the coordination of the
superintendents of the academies, the Director, DFAS is responsible for billing and collecting
reimbursements due to the academies for foreign students, except when those reimbursements
have been waived by the USD(P).


7. IG DoD. The IG DoD evaluates programs, as set forth in DoDD 5106.01 (Reference (j)) and
chapter 4 of Title 5, U.S.C. (also known as and referred to in this instruction as the “Inspector
General Act of 1978, as amended” (Reference (k)).


8. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

   a. Establish and maintain a military academy pursuant to chapters 33, 47, 61, 753, 853, and
953 and sections 702 and 2005 of Reference (g) and this instruction. Chapter 47 of
Reference (g) is also known as the “Uniform Code of Military Justice,” as amended.

   b. Ensure appropriate oversight and management of the academies. Ensure compliance with
DoDI 5400.11 (Reference (l)), DoD 5400.11-R (Reference (m)), DoDI 1000.30 (Reference (n)),
and DoDI 6025.18 (Reference (o)) when handling information.

    c. Develop quantified performance goals and measures linked with the schools’ mission
statements to annually evaluate the performance of the academies and preparatory schools.

   d. Prescribe a written agreement when providing an academy appointment to U.S. candidates
who agree to conditions in section 6 of Enclosure 3 and are otherwise qualified.

   e. Prescribe regulations on:

       (1) A breach of a cadet’s or midshipman’s “agreement to serve” for the purpose of
ordering that individual to active duty.



Change 1, 11/01/2023                            8
                                                                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


       (2) Procedures for determining whether such a breach has occurred.

       (3) Standards for determining the period of time for which a person may be ordered to
serve on active duty according to section 10 of Enclosure 3 of this instruction. (See also
sections 7448(d), 8459(d), and 9448(d) of Reference (g)).

    f. Work with the Director, DFAS to establish and maintain jointly developed, uniform
accounting procedures for determining the cost of education at their respective academies. These
procedures must be consistent with Volume 11A, chapter 6 of DoD 7000.14-R and
DoDI 5010.40 (References (p) and (q)). A standard method for computing reimbursement of the
cost of education will be in these procedures, and accounts receivable will be recorded as
follows:

       (1) Establish an accounts receivable for the cost of education when a cadet or
midshipman disenrolls or is disenrolled from an academy.

        (2) Reduce the accounts receivable proportionately to the period of active duty served by
the disenrolled cadets or midshipmen.

   g. Prescribe the repayment procedures of an individual’s outstanding debt so that the total
amount due–based on section 373 of Title 37, U.S.C. (Reference (r)), monthly repayment
schedules, repayment method, and other information–will be clearly explained in writing to the
debtor.

    h. Ensure that proper credit management and debt collection procedures are followed
pursuant to chapter 8 of Volume 5; chapters 2, 38, 50, and 52 of Volume 7A; and chapters 1-4
and 7 of Volume 16 of Reference (p) to include prescribing repayment procedures of an
individual’s outstanding academy financial obligation.

    i. Develop an organizational capability to collect, maintain, and submit information on
resources in support of an academy, the academy preparatory school, and any other associated
training programs.




Change 1, 11/01/2023                            9
                                                                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                          PROCEDURES


1. ACADEMIES. Academies are 4-year educational institutions operated by each of the
Military Departments to provide successful candidates with degrees of Bachelor of Science and
commissions as military officers. The core of the academies’ mission statements will be to
educate, train, and inspire men and women to become officers in the Military Services to serve
the United States.


2. ORGANIZATION OF THE ACADEMIES.

    a. There will be at each academy a superintendent and commandant appointed by the
President, a dean of the faculty, a chaplain, permanent professors, an athletic director, and a
director of admissions. The Secretaries of the Military Departments may employ as many
civilian faculty members as considered necessary.

    b. Incumbents of dean, director of admissions, and permanent professorships held by
military personnel will be appointed by the President of the United States by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate. The superintendent and the commandant will be detailed to those
positions by the President.

    c. The immediate governance of the academies is by their superintendents, who also will
serve as the commanding officers of the academies and their military posts.

    d. The superintendent is responsible for the day-to-day operation of the academy as well as
the welfare of cadets or midshipmen and staff.

    e. The dean of the faculty of the academy directs and manages the development and
execution of an undergraduate curriculum that recognizes the requirement for graduates to
understand technology, while gaining a sound historical perspective and an understanding of
different cultures. The curriculum will be broadly based in the physical and social sciences, the
study of languages and cultures in areas in which the DoD is engaged, and the arts and
humanities.

   f. The commandant directs and manages military education and training programs and
exercises command over cadets or midshipmen, as established by law and determined by the
superintendent.

    g. The director of athletics directs and manages the intercollegiate athletic programs and
other physical fitness programs, as determined by the superintendent. Intercollegiate athletic
programs will be in full compliance with all applicable National Collegiate Athletic Association
rules and requirements while maintaining the professional and ethical values of the Services.




Change 1, 11/01/2023                             10                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                             DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


    h. The academic faculty will consist of civilian and military members in proportions
determined by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned. Faculty members will
possess a mix of operational experience, academic expertise, and teaching ability. They:

        (1) Exemplify the highest standards of ethical and moral conduct and performance
established by the Secretaries of the Military Departments concerned, and the superintendents
concerned, consistent with this instruction.

       (2) Participate in the full spectrum of academy programs and activities and the
development of their curriculum.

       (3) Actively participate in the professional, moral, and ethical development of cadets and
midshipmen as role models and mentors and through the enforcement of standards of behavior
and conduct.

   i. Service members will conduct themselves in accordance with the requirement of
exemplary conduct as specified in sections 7233, 8167, and 9233 of Reference (g).

    j. The superintendent will ensure that noninstructional staff consists of the minimum number
of people consistent with effective achievement of the objectives of the academy and its military
post.

    k. Compensation and benefits for civilian faculty members will be sufficiently competitive
to achieve academic excellence at pay levels determined by the Secretary of the Military
Department concerned.

    l. Additional guidance about organization of the academies is in chapters 753, 853, and 953
of Reference (g).


3. NOMINATION AND APPOINTMENT OF CADETS AND MIDSHIPMEN.

   a. Nomination, appointment, admission, authorized strength, and allocation of strength
among nominating authorities for cadets and midshipmen are prescribed in chapters 753, 853,
and 953 of Reference (g) and this instruction.

   b. U.S. cadets and midshipmen will be appointed by the President alone. An appointment is
conditional until the cadet or midshipman is admitted.

    c. Appointments will be offered on a competitive basis to nominated candidates having the
strongest potential for success as cadets or midshipmen and ultimately as commissioned officers.
The nominating sources will be notified of candidates selected for appointment.

    d. Those selected for appointment must have demonstrated, through evaluations prescribed
by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned:




Change 1, 11/01/2023                           11                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


       (1) High standards of moral character, personal conduct, and integrity.

       (2) The potential to successfully complete the program of instruction.

       (3) An acceptable level of physical fitness.

       (4) Medical qualification for appointments to the academies and for commissioning as
required in chapter 33 of Reference (g) and further delineated through examination procedures
and medical standards defined in Reference (i)), DoDI 6485.01 (Reference (s)), and
DoDI 1010.16 (Reference (t)).

   e. Specific eligibility criteria also guide selection:

      (1) Age. Applicants must be at least 17 years of age and not have passed their
  rd
23 birthday on July 1 of the year of entry into an academy.

        (2) Citizenship. Except for foreigners admitted to the academies under chapters 753,
853, and 953 of Reference (g) and this instruction, those appointed must be citizens or nationals
of the United States.

       (3) Residence. If nominated by an authority designated in the “Congressional” and
“U.S. Possession” categories as defined in chapters 753, 853, and 953 of Reference (g),
applicants must be domiciled in the constituency of such authorities.

       (4) Dependents. On the first day of enrollment, those appointed as cadets, midshipmen,
or preparatory school students must not have dependents, be responsible for an existing
pregnancy, or be pregnant.

       (5) Marital Status. Those appointed as cadets or midshipmen cannot have a spouse while
enrolled in an academy.

    f. The academies will work to ensure timely medical evaluations of applicants. Issues
relating to the administrative management of those evaluations that are not resolved to the
satisfaction of the academies and the activity performing the evaluation will be forwarded to the
ASD(M&RA) for resolution.

    g. To be admitted to an academy, U.S. appointees must take and subscribe to an oath
prescribed by law or by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned. If a U.S. candidate
for admission refuses to take and subscribe to the prescribed oath, the appointment is terminated.


4. CADETS AND MIDSHIPMEN FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES

    a. Foreign students may receive instruction at an academy; the number may not exceed the
limits in chapters 753, 853, and 953 of Reference (g). Such instruction will be on a reimbursable




Change 1, 11/01/2023                              12                      ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


basis. The USD(P) designates the countries from which candidates may be selected and may
waive reimbursement, either wholly or partially.

        (1) Although not eligible for a formal appointment, foreign students admitted to the
academies for a course of study will be called cadets and midshipmen, will be accountable to
policies and procedures that govern attendance, and are entitled to the equivalent pay and
allowances of a cadet or midshipmen appointed from the United States and from the same
appropriation.

        (2) Foreign students will not take the oath addressed in paragraph 3g of this enclosure,
are at no time considered to be serving in any status in the Military Services, and will not be
eligible for nor offered a commission in the Military Services upon satisfactory completion of
their academy course of study nor eligible to be called to active duty if disenrolled.

   b. Not more than three foreign students from a single country may be enrolled at a single
academy without ASD(M&RA) approval. Requests for such approval will be submitted by the
Secretary of the Military Department concerned, through the USD(P) to the ASD(M&RA). The
enrollment restriction does not apply to students participating in exchange programs of up to two
semesters’ duration.

   c. By the end of May of each year, the USD(C)/CFO will establish the tuition rate for the
succeeding school year and publish that rate to the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the
USD(P), and the ASD(M&RA).

   d. By the end of June of each year, the USD(P) will publish a list of countries eligible to
send students to the academies during the subsequent academic year, specifying reimbursement
requirements. That list will be provided to the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the
ASD(M&RA), and the responsible U.S. Defense Attaché Offices (USDAOs) or the American
embassies, if no servicing USDAO exists.

    e. By the end of August of each year, the superintendent of each academy will extend
application invitations, through applicable USDAOs (or the American embassies), to each
eligible country. Those invitations will describe admissions procedures and define the country’s
official sponsorship responsibilities.

    f. The superintendent will manage the selection and notification of candidates and, with the
assistance of the applicable USDAO or American embassy, obtain written acknowledgment from
the sending government of sponsorship responsibilities and their agreement to reimburse tuition
costs, when applicable.

    g. Questions on enrollment or reimbursement will be forwarded to the ASD(M&RA) for
resolution with the USD(P).




Change 1, 11/01/2023                            13                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


5. DEVELOPMENT OF CADETS AND MIDSHIPMEN.

   a. Development of cadets and midshipmen is prescribed in chapters 753, 853, and 953 of
Reference (g) and this instruction.

    b. The normal course of instruction at an academy is 4 years, with selected promising cadets
or midshipmen pursuing longer terms when required to meet academy educational or other
graduation requirements. The Secretaries of the Military Departments will arrange the course of
instruction so that cadets or midshipmen are not required to attend classes on Sunday.

    c. Besides academic preparation, each academy will provide for development of military and
leadership skills and physical fitness.

   d. The practice of hazing is prohibited by Department policy and law (see sections 7452,
8464, and 9452 of Reference (g)).

    e. An important component in the growth of cadets or midshipmen is the leadership
development system. Its purpose is to motivate graduates to seek leadership responsibilities and
enable them to think clearly, decide wisely, and act decisively under pressure and in a variety of
leadership situations. The leadership development system will be based on:

       (1) Positive leadership, equal opportunity, and respect for one another’s values, beliefs,
and personal dignity.

       (2) Elimination of dysfunctional stress. The Secretaries of the Military Departments
concerned and superintendents determine knowledge requirements and procedures for the
development and indoctrination of cadets and midshipmen. Memorization of trivia, such as
complete menus for meals, is generally inappropriate. Establishment of such requirements will
be closely monitored by the academies.

       (3) Emphasis on proper bearing, fitness, and posture. These are important to effective
leadership and contribute to overall well-being. Exaggerated forms of posture, speech, or
movement generally do not constitute proper military bearing. Establishment of such
requirements will be closely monitored by the academies and used only with the knowledge and
approval of the superintendents.

        (4) Positive role models; opportunities to learn, practice, and receive feedback; and
access to support. Direct support to leadership development will be provided by concurrent and
relevant coursework, athletic competition, and hands-on experience to show the relationship
between theories of leadership in the classroom and practice of leadership outside the classroom.

    f. The highest ethical and moral standards are expected of the officer corps. The honor
systems of the academies will support that expectation by enforcing adherence to standards of
behavior embodied in the honor codes or concepts of the academies. Violations of honor
standards may constitute a basis for disenrollment.




Change 1, 11/01/2023                            14                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


6. MANAGEMENT OF CADETS AND MIDSHIPMEN.

   a. A U.S. cadet or midshipman entering an academy directly from civilian status assumes a
Military Service obligation (MSO) of 8 years, under section 651 of Reference (g) and
DoDI 1304.25 (Reference (u)).

     b. Cadet and midshipman pay is prescribed by section 203(c) of Reference (r).

    c. Cadets and midshipmen will meet medical accession standards outlined in
paragraph 3d(4) of this enclosure.

    d. As a condition for providing education at an academy, the Secretary of the Military
Department concerned will require that each U.S. cadet or midshipman enter into a written
agreement in which he or she agrees:

        (1) To complete the course of instruction for graduation specified in the agreement to
accept an appointment as a commissioned officer, if tendered, and to serve on active duty for a
period specified in the agreement if called to active duty or, at the option of the Secretary of the
Military Department concerned, to reimburse the United States for the amount specified by the
Secretary of Military Department concerned, as prescribed in this enclosure.

        (2) That if such cadet or midshipman fails to complete the educational requirements
specified in the agreement, such person, if so ordered by the Secretary of the Military
Department concerned, will serve on active duty for a period specified in the agreement.

        (3) That if such person fails to complete the period of active duty specified in the
agreement, he or she will reimburse the United States for the amount specified by the Secretary
of the Military Department concerned in accordance with the requirements of section 2005 of
Reference (g) and section 303a of Reference (r).

       (4) To such other terms and conditions as the Secretary of the Military Department
concerned may prescribe to protect U.S. interests.

    e. An obligation to repay the United States under this subsection is, for all purposes, a debt
owed the United States. A discharge in bankruptcy under Title 11, U.S.C. (Reference (v)), does
not discharge a person from such debt if the discharge order is entered less than 5 years after:

        (1) The date of the termination of the agreement or contract on which the debt is based;
or

        (2) In the absence of such agreement or contract, the date of the termination of the
service on which the debt is based.

    f. The sustainment of high performance standards ensures that cadets and midshipmen who
are unwilling or unable to successfully complete the program of instruction at the academy are
identified quickly. As defined by the Military Department concerned, cadets or midshipmen



Change 1, 11/01/2023                             15                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


who are identified as “deficient” in conduct, studies, or physical fitness and disenrolled from any
academy may not, unless recommended by an academic or academy board, be returned or
reappointed to an academy. Those cadets or midshipmen selected for return will be reappointed
consistent with the criteria prescribed by the board.

       (1) Individuals failing to complete the required course of academy instruction (including
disenrollment for academics, conduct, honor code violations, or physical deficiency) will be
disenrolled.

        (2) If an appointment is terminated before graduation due to a U.S. cadet’s or
midshipman’s breaching his or her agreement, or if a U.S. cadet or midshipman refuses to accept
a commission following graduation, the 8-year MSO will be fulfilled by the period for which the
member is ordered to serve on active duty or in the Reserve Component in an applicable enlisted
status. He or she may be ordered to active duty for a period not to exceed 4 years under
sections 7448(b), 8459(b), or 9448(b) of Reference (g). Policies that apply to U.S. cadets or
midshipmen disenrolled from an academy who entered the academy directly from civilian status
are:

            (a) Fourth and Third Classmen (First and Second Years). A fourth or third classman
disenrolled will retain their MSO (References (g) and (p)) but have no active duty service
obligation (ADSO).

            (b) Second Classmen (Third Year). A second classman resigning before the start of
the second class academic year or disenrolled for cause resulting from actions that occurred only
before the start of the second class academic year will be discharged as if he or she were a third
classman.

             (c) Second or First Classmen (Third and Fourth or Subsequent Years). Any second
or first classman who is disenrolled and who is not suited for enlisted Military Service for
reasons of demonstrated unsuitability, unfitness, or physical disqualification will be discharged
in accordance with the current Military Service regulations that implement this Instruction, to
include monetary recoupment. Other second or first class cadets and midshipmen disenrolled
after the beginning of the second class academic year, but before completing the course of
instruction, may be transferred to the Reserve Component in an enlisted status and ordered to
active duty for not less than 2 years, but not more than 4 years, and incur a MSO, in accordance
with sections 7448(b), 8459(b), or 9448(b) of Reference (g).

            (d) First Classman (Declining Appointment). Any first classman completing the
course of instruction and declining to accept an appointment as a commissioned officer may be
transferred to the respective Reserve Component in an enlisted status and ordered to active duty
for 4 years and incurs an MSO in accordance with sections 7448(b), 8459(b), or 9448(b) of
Reference (g) and DoDI 1235.12 (Reference (w)).

       (3) The disposition of cadets and midshipmen entering an academy from the Regular or
Reserve Component of any Military Service (except those who enter an academy by way of its




Change 1, 11/01/2023                            16                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


preparatory school from civilian status) and then not completing the program will be determined
in accordance with section 516 of Reference (g):

            (a) Fourth and Third Classmen (First and Second Years). If disenrolled during the
fourth or third class year, the cadet’s or midshipman’s Military Service commitment will be
equal to the time not served on the original enlistment contract, with all service as a cadet or
midshipman counted as service under that contract. Those individuals with less than 1 year
remaining in the original enlistment contract may be discharged on approval of the disenrollment
by the Military Department concerned.

            (b) Second Classmen (Third Year). If disenrolled before the beginning of the second
class academic year, the cadet’s or midshipman’s Military Service commitment will be the same
as in paragraph 6f(3)(c) of this enclosure.

            (c) Second or First Classmen (Third and Fourth or Subsequent Years). If first and
second classmen are disenrolled for issues occurring after the beginning of the second class
academic year, their Military Service commitment will be the same as in paragraphs 6f(2)(c) and
6f(2)(d) of this enclosure, as appropriate, or will be equal to the time not served on the original
enlistment contract (with all service as a cadet or midshipman counted as service under that
contract), whichever period is longer.

            (d) Disenrolled Cadets or Midshipmen Not Suited for Enlisted Military Service. A
cadet or midshipman who entered into an academy from the Regular or Reserve Component of a
Military Service who is subsequently disenrolled from an academy and is not suited for enlisted
Military Service because of demonstrated unsuitability, unfitness, or physical disqualification
will be discharged in accordance with DoDI 1332.14 (Reference (x)) and Military Department
regulations that specifically address the disenrollment of cadets or midshipmen.

            (e) Military Grade of Disenrolled Cadets or Midshipmen Transferred to the Reserve
Component or Active Duty. Whether transferred to the Reserve Component or reverted to active
duty status, the disenrolled cadets and midshipmen retain their prior enlisted grade. However, in
no case will the cadet or midshipman be transferred to the Reserve Component in a grade lower
than would a similarly situated cadet or midshipman who entered the academy from a civilian
status.

       (4) The disposition of U.S. cadets and midshipmen entering an academy by way of its
preparatory school from civilian status and then not completing the program will be managed in
accordance with paragraphs 6f(2) through 6f(2)(d) of this enclosure.

         (5) A cadet or midshipman tendering a resignation will be required to state a reason for
this action. A resignation may be accepted when in the interest of the Military Service.
Accepting the resignation will not in and of itself constitute a determination of the U.S. cadet’s
or midshipman’s qualification for enlisted Military Service.

      (6) U.S. cadets or midshipmen who are not ordered to active duty due to their
misconduct or unsuitability, or because their petition for relief from an active duty obligation



Change 1, 11/01/2023                             17                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


was approved by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned, must reimburse the United
States in accordance with the requirements of section 2005 of Reference (g) and section 303a of
Reference (r) for education costs commensurate with time spent at the academy. The Secretary
of the Military Department concerned may remit or cancel any part of the indebtedness of a cadet
or midshipman to the United States. There may be circumstances when neither Active Duty nor
reimbursement is appropriate. The Secretaries of the Military Departments will carefully review
the circumstances to determine whether waiving Active Duty or reimbursement is consistent
with existing statutory requirements, personnel policies or management objectives, and equity
and good conscience and is in the best interest of the United States. Such circumstances may
include, but are not limited to, a cadet’s or midshipman’s death, illness, injury, or other
impairment that is not the result of the cadet’s or midshipman’s misconduct or needs of the
Service.

        (7) Change in Status Notification. When a U.S. cadet or midshipman is disenrolled from
an academy and discharged from the Service concerned, the Selective Service System will be
notified by the Military Department of the individual’s status change.

        (8) U.S. cadets or midshipmen who become the parent of a biological dependent as the
result of the birth of a child, by becoming pregnant with or fathering a child after the first day of
enrollment have the following options under Paragraphs 6f(8)(a)-(d), which apply to both the
birth and non-birth parent:

             (a) The cadet or midshipman requests a transfer to the Senior Reserve Officer
Training Corps (SROTC). Approval and method of transfer are at the discretion of the Secretary
of the Military Department concerned. Cadets and midshipmen who are approved to transfer to
SROTC, graduate, receive a commission, and fulfill their ADSO are not subject to
reimbursement as outlined in paragraphs 6f(2)(a) through (d) of this enclosure; or

             (b) The cadet or midshipman implements a family care plan pursuant to
DoDI 1342.19 (Reference (y)) and applicable Military Service policies and maintains parental
rights for the duration of their remaining time at an MSA. The family care plan is subject to final
approval by the MSA Superintendent, but approval authority may be delegated no lower than the
Commandant. Pregnant cadets and midshipmen will request a leave of absence for good cause
for the delivery and care of their dependent child with the intention to return to the MSA as
prescribed by Paragraph 6f(10)(e) of this enclosure.

                1. The dependent child will not reside with the cadet or midshipman at the
MSA but will reside with the caregiver identified in the family care plan.

                 2. The family care plan must detail who will be responsible for the logistical,
financial, medical, educational, and legal documentation necessary to ensure continuity of care
and support for the dependent for the cadet or midshipman’s remaining time at the MSA; or

             (c) The cadet or midshipman permanently terminates parental rights through a court,
formally giving the dependent up for adoption, transferring legal and physical custody
responsibility to a designated caregiver; or



Change 1, 11/01/2023                             18                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


            (d) The cadet or midshipman voluntarily resigns. Cadets and midshipmen in good
standing who voluntarily resign due to dependency and/or pregnancy and have an active duty
service commitment and who do not pursue transfer to the SROTC or implement a family care
plan and remain at the MSA concerned may be subject to recoupment or enlisted service.

       (9) Cadets and midshipmen who opt to implement a family care plan and maintain
parental rights.

             (a) The subparagraphs in Paragraph 6f(8) of this enclosure will not be construed to
alleviate a cadet or midshipman from parental responsibilities imposed by agreement or State or
local law. Cadets and midshipmen are encouraged to consult with military and civilian counsel
concerning their options.

             (b) A cadet or midshipman who opts to maintain parental rights in accordance
with Paragraph 6f(8)(b) will not receive additional benefits, pay, or allowances as a result of
their gaining a dependent until commissioned into active duty service; the cadet or midshipman’s
dependent will be eligible for TRICARE, commissary, and exchange privileges and any other
benefits or entitlements authorized in accordance with applicable laws and regulations for the
dependent of a Service member on active duty.

             (c) All physical fitness requirements are temporarily waived throughout pregnancy
until the cadet or midshipman is medically cleared to resume physical fitness activities. With
approval from medical providers, a cadet and midshipman may volunteer to complete a physical
fitness requirement without ending the exemption early. The cadet and midshipman will have to
meet physical fitness requirements before being allowed to graduate and commission from their
MSA.

       (10) Disenrollment of cadets and midshipmen for medical disqualification.

            (a) Persons separated for being medically disqualified from further Military Service
will be separated and will not be obligated for further Military Service or for reimbursing
education costs in accordance paragraph 6f(6) of this enclosure.

             (b) Persons separated for reasons in addition to being medically disqualified from
further Military Service may be obligated for reimbursing education costs at the discretion of the
Military Department concerned.

            (c) Cadets and midshipmen who become medically disqualified for appointment as a
commissioned officer during their senior year, who otherwise would be qualified to complete the
course of instruction and be appointed as a commissioned officer, and who are capable of
completing the academic course of instruction with their peers, may be permitted by the
Secretary of the Military Department concerned to complete the academic course of instruction
with award of an academic credential determined by the Secretary of the Military Department
concerned.




Change 1, 11/01/2023                            19                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


            (d) Pursuant to section 1217 of Reference (g), when the Secretary of the Military
Department concerned determines that a U.S. cadet or midshipman is medically disqualified for
appointment as a commissioned officer due to injury, illness, or disease aggravated or incurred in
the line of duty while entitled to cadet or midshipman pay, the Secretary may retire the cadet or
midshipman with retired pay in accordance with chapter 61 of Reference (g).

            (e) A cadet or midshipmen who becomes pregnant may be granted a leave of
absence for good cause by the MSA Superintendent. This authority may be delegated no lower
than the Commandant. In most cases, a 1-year leave of absence will be sufficient. In unique
circumstances, the MSA Superintendent can grant a leave of absence not to exceed 2 years
(730 days). Each MSA must establish a leave of absence policy in accordance with section
702(b)(1)(C) of Reference (g). The leave of absence policy will require the following to be
considered before any determination on the length of a leave of absence:

               1. Advice of the pregnant cadet or midshipman’s medical provider.

               2. Curriculum, training, and graduation requirements of the MSA.

               3. Commissioning requirements.

7. GRADUATION AND COMMISSION.

    a. Cadets and midshipmen who complete all requirements prescribed by the Secretary of the
Military Department concerned for graduation and appointment may be awarded a bachelor of
science degree, and U.S. cadets and midshipmen who meet medical accession standards outlined
in paragraph 3d(4) of this enclosure are eligible to be commissioned, in accordance with
chapters 33, 753, 853, and 953 of Reference (g).

   b. Graduation leave will be administered in accordance with section 702 of Reference (g).

    c. Officers appointed from cadet or midshipman status will not be voluntarily released from
active duty principally to pursue a professional sports activity with the potential of public affairs
or recruiting benefit to the DoD during the initial 2 years of active commissioned service. A
waiver to release a cadet or midshipman prior to the completion of 2 years of active service must
be approved by the ASD(M&RA). Exceptional personnel with unique talents and abilities may
be authorized excess leave or be released from active duty and transferred to the Selective
Reserve after completing 2 years of active commissioned service when there is a strong
expectation their professional sports activity will provide the DoD with significant favorable
media exposure likely to enhance national recruiting or public affairs.

       (1) Approval Authority and Processing Requirements. Secretaries of the Military
Departments will establish the approval authority and specific processing requirements for all
requests for excess leave and early release from active duty under this program.

      (2) Excess Leave. Officers may apply for excess leave, after serving a minimum of
24 months of the current obligated active duty period, for a period not to exceed 1 year, for the



Change 1, 11/01/2023                             20                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


purpose of pursuing a professional sports activity with potential recruiting or public affairs
benefits to the DoD. The agreement between the individual and the professional sports team or
organization must reflect the intent of both parties to employ the individual in a way that brings
credit to the DoD. Personnel are not entitled to pay and allowances while in excess leave status,
nor are they entitled to receive disability retired pay if incurring a physical disability while in
excess leave status. Officers must:

             (a) Remain subject to recall to active duty.

             (b) Be in good standing, to include meeting all physical fitness requirements and
standards.

            (c) Have secured an actual contract or binding commitment with a professional team
or organization guaranteeing the opportunity to pursue an activity with potential recruiting
benefits as described.

           (d) Acknowledge that time served in excess leave will not be used to satisfy an
existing ADSO.

        (3) Early Release. Officers may request early release from their ADSO for the purpose
of pursuing a professional sports activity with potential recruiting or public affairs benefits for
the DoD. The agreement between the individual and the professional sports team or organization
must reflect the intent of both parties to employ the individual in a way that brings credit to the
DoD. Military Departments will notify the ASD(M&RA) when an officer is released early from
active duty under this program. In addition to any further requirements as determined
appropriate by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned, applicants for early release
must, at a minimum:

             (a) Have served 24 months of the original ADSO.

             (b) Be in good standing, to include meeting all physical fitness requirements and
standards.

            (c) Have secured an actual contract or binding commitment with a professional
sports team or organization guaranteeing the opportunity to pursue an activity with potential
recruiting benefits as described.

           (d) Be assigned to a Selected Reserve unit and meet normal retention requirements
based on minimum participation standards in accordance with sections 10147 and 10148 of
Reference (g) and be subject to immediate involuntary recall for any reason to complete the
period of active duty from which early release was granted.

            (e) Acknowledge that the officer is subject to monetary repayment of educational
benefits at a prorated share based on the period of unfulfilled ADSO and that such recoupment is
in addition to the two-for-one Selected Reserve obligation required in paragraph 7c(3) of this
enclosure. Officers subject to recoupment under the provisions of section 2005 of Reference (g)



Change 1, 11/01/2023                              21                       ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


for receipt of advanced education assistance must reimburse the United States a pro-rata share of
the cost of their advanced education assistance based on the period of unfulfilled active duty
service.

            (f) Agree that, in the event that the officer is no longer under a contract or binding
agreement with a professional sports team or organization, the officer will either return to active
duty to complete the remaining ADSO or continue in the Selected Reserve for a period of not
less than two times the length of their remaining ADSO, as determined by their Service.

    d. At the discretion of the Secretary of the Military Department concerned, first class cadets
or midshipmen not medically qualified for commissioning may be placed on limited duty status,
as defined by the Military Department concerned, for up to 1 year until medical commissioning
requirements of this section and the Military Service are met. If all requirements are met, the
cadet or midshipmen may be commissioned. If these requirements are not met, the cadet or
midshipmen will be disenrolled subject to recoupment as discussed in paragraph 6f(2)(c) and
6f(10) of this enclosure.


8. ACADEMY PREPARATORY SCHOOLS.

    a. Academy preparatory schools provide an avenue for effective transition to the academy
environment. The academy preparatory schools prepare selected candidates for admission who
are judged to need additional preparation in academics, physical fitness, or character
development.

        (1) Each school’s programs of instruction will focus on academic preparation and on
those areas of personal and physical preparation that reflect the mission of both the academy and
the Service concerned.

       (2) The core of the academy preparatory schools’ mission statement will be “To
motivate, prepare, and evaluate selected candidates in an academic, military, moral, and physical
environment, to perform successfully at the ________ Academy.”

    b. Faculty members will possess academic expertise and teaching prowess. They will
exemplify high standards of conduct and performance. Faculty members will be expected to
participate in the full spectrum of the school’s programs, to include providing leadership,
exemplary conduct and moral behavior for cadet candidates and midshipman candidates to
emulate, as well as involvement in the development of curricular and extracurricular activities.
Curriculum design will recognize academic preparation as the priority; associated programs will
capitalize on economies and efficiencies.

    c. Preparatory school programs will provide tailored individual instruction to strengthen
candidate abilities and to correct deficiencies in academic areas emphasized by the academies.
Additionally, preparatory school programs will provide supplementary instruction in military
orientation, physical development, athletics, leadership, character development, and other
specific areas of interest determined by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned.



Change 1, 11/01/2023                            22                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                             DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


     d. Candidates attending a preparatory school come from two distinct sources: first, current
enlisted Service members from the Active or Reserve Components; and second, civilians with no
previous military status. Such civilians who become candidates slated to attend a preparatory
school will be enlisted as a member of the Reserve Component of the applicable Military Service
using Department of Defense Form 4, “Enlistment/Reenlistment Document Armed Forces of the
United States,” available on the DoD Forms Management Program Website. Such civilians will
then be ordered to voluntary active duty for training pursuant to section 12301(d) of
Reference (g) to serve as candidates at their respective preparatory school.


9. REVIEW AND OVERSIGHT.

    a. Service academies will establish quantified performance goals and measures, linked with
their respective school’s mission statement to annually evaluate the performance of the
academies. Metrics will include graduation rate for enrolled candidates. The graduation rates of
those entering the academies should be at least 75 percent.

    b. Preparatory schools will establish quantified performance goals and measures, linked with
the schools’ mission statements to annually evaluate the performance of the preparatory schools.
At a minimum the metrics will include:

       (1) Academy Preparatory School to Academy Entrance Ratio. The ratio of the number
of preparatory school students entering the academy to the number that entered prep school
should be 70 percent or greater.

       (2) Preparatory Student and Direct Appointee Graduation Rate. The preparatory school
students’ academy graduation rate should not drop more than 5 percent below the direct
appointees’ graduation rate.

   c. Boards of Visitors of the academies are established and procedures prescribed by
chapters 753, 853, and 953 of Reference (g) to inquire into the efficiency and effectiveness of
academy operations. The designated federal officer for each Board of Visitors will provide the
ASD(M&RA) a copy of each report required by Reference (g) within 60 days of the report’s
submission to the President.

    d. Oversight by the IG DoD will be provided in accordance with Reference (j) and the
Inspector General Act of 1978. When required, the ASD(M&RA) recommends to the IG DoD
any areas of academy operations that merit specific review during the subsequent fiscal year.

    e. Annual meetings of the superintendents will be hosted by the academies on a rotating
basis and include the commandants, the deans, the directors of admissions and athletics, and
others designated by the superintendents. Meeting attendees will discuss performance measures
and other matters of collective interest. Meeting attendees will identify plans to address areas
requiring corrective action. Following the meeting, the host superintendent will provide the
ASD(M&RA) a summary of issues and actions discussed and each Service academy will provide
an assessment of their respective academy and preparatory school.



Change 1, 11/01/2023                           23                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


10. INTER-SERVICE COMMISSIONING

    a. To be qualified for inter-Service appointment, applicants must meet all graduation
requirements and all requirements for commissioning in the gaining Service; and both the
gaining and losing Secretaries of the Military Departments concerned must concur in the
appointment. In accordance with chapter 33 of Reference (g), not more than 12.5 percent of a
graduating class from any academy may be commissioned in the Military Services not under the
jurisdiction of the Military Department administering that academy.

    b. Once all requirements for inter-Service appointments have been met, endorsements from
the losing academy will contain the applicants’ current academic transcripts; order of merit
standing; record of physical fitness; and, if applicable, results of the gaining Service’s testing for
flight training or other qualification. Applications supported by the losing Military Department
will be forwarded to the gaining Military Department no later than November of the calendar
year before graduation. The gaining Secretary of the Military Department concerned will act on
applications no later than the end of December of the year prior to commissioning and will
immediately notify the losing Secretary of the Military Department concerned of decisions.
Affected cadets or midshipmen will be quickly notified of the disposition of applications.

     c. Those selected for transfer will be integrated within active duty lists of the gaining
Military Service. When seniority on that list relies on academy class standing, they will be
initially integrated immediately following the cadet or midshipman holding equal numerical
class standing at the academy of the gaining Military Department.




Change 1, 11/01/2023                              24                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015



                                          ENCLOSURE 4

                  APPLICANT BRIEFING ITEM ON SEPARATION POLICY


1. INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY. Service members represent the Military Services by
word, actions, and appearance. Their unique position in society requires them to uphold the
dignity and high standards of the Military Services at all times and in all places. In order to be
ready at all times for worldwide deployment, military units and their members must possess high
standards of integrity, cohesion, and good order and discipline. As a result, military laws, rules,
customs, and traditions include restrictions on personal behavior that are different from civilian
life. Service members may be involuntarily separated before their enlistment or term of service
ends for various reasons established by law and military regulations. These are some of the
circumstances that may be grounds for involuntary separation from the academy:

    a. Infractions. The individual establishes a pattern of disciplinary infractions or discreditable
involvement with civil or military authorities, causes dissent, or disrupts or degrades the mission
of his or her unit. That may also include conduct of any nature that would bring discredit on the
Military Services in the view of the civilian community.

   b. Dependency.

       (1) Unauthorized Dependency. Any person for whom an individual has a legally recognized
obligation to provide support including but not limited to biological children conceived or born
before enrollment; spouse, adoptive, or stepchildren acquired before or during enrollment; or failing
to have an approved family care plan for biological children with whom they became pregnant or by
whom they fathered after enrollment as a cadet or midshipmen. See paragraphs 3e(4) and (5) and
6f(8) of Enclosure 3 for additional details on biological children acquired while a cadet or
midshipmen.


      (2) Non-compliant Authorized Dependency. Failing to implement or otherwise not
adhering to a family care plan for a biological child with whom they became pregnant or by
whom they fathered after enrollment as a cadet or midshipman. See paragraph 6f(8) of
Enclosure 3 for additional details on biological children a cadet or midshipmen.

    c. Physical fitness and body fat. The individual fails to meet the physical fitness or body fat
standards.


2. HAZING, HARASSMENT, OR VIOLENCE NOT TOLERATED. The practice of hazing is
prohibited by law (sections 7452, 8464, and 9452 of Reference (g)). A cadet or midshipman
dismissed from an academy for hazing may not be reappointed as a cadet or midshipman at an
academy. The Military Services do not tolerate harassment or violence against any Service



Change 1, 11/01/2023                             25                         ENCLOSURE 4
                                                            DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


member for any reason. Cadets and midshipmen must treat all Service members, at all times,
with dignity and respect. Failure to do so may result in the individual being disciplined or
involuntarily separated before his or her term of service ends.




Change 1, 11/01/2023                          26                        ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADSO      active duty service obligation
ASD(M&RA) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs

DFAS             Defense Finance and Accounting Service
DoDD             DoD directive
DoDI             DoD instruction

IG DoD           Inspector General of the Department of Defense

MSA              Military Service academy
MSO              Military Service obligation

SROTC            Senior Reserve Officer Training Corps

U.S.C.           United States Code
USD(C)/CFO       Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                 Department of Defense
USDAO            U.S. Defense Attaché Office
USD(P)           Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)         Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

academic year. The time period beginning the first day of the fall semester and ending on the
last day of the spring semester.

academy(ies). The U.S. Military, the U.S. Naval, and the U.S. Air Force Academy.

academy preparatory schools. Postsecondary educational institutions operated by each of the
Military Departments to provide enhanced opportunities for selected candidates to be appointed
to the academies.

active duty lists. A single list of certain officers serving on active duty. Officers are carried on
the active duty list of the Military Service of which they are members in order of seniority. (See
section 620 of Reference (g) for additional information).

ADSO. A commitment of active military service for a specified period of time.




Change 1, 11/01/2023                             27                            GLOSSARY
                                                              DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


agreement. The document signed by a U.S. cadet or midshipman in accordance with sections
2005, 7448(a), 8459(a), and 9448(a) of Reference (g).

appointment. U.S. applicants who are selected for admission to the academies are appointed by
the President as cadets or midshipmen. Those U.S. cadets and midshipmen who complete the
course of instruction at an academy may be appointed as a commissioned officer in a Military
Service. Foreign students admitted to the academies for a course of study pursuant to
chapters 753, 853, and 953 of Reference (g) and this instruction are not formally appointed as
cadets or midshipmen.

Boards of Visitors. Boards that visit the academies annually and provide a report to the
President of their views and recommendations about the academies. Chapters 403, 603, and 903
of Reference (g) define the composition and purpose of those boards.

cadets and midshipmen. U.S. citizens having been appointed to one of the academies and having
taken the oath as cadets or midshipmen. Although not eligible for a formal appointment, foreign
students admitted to the academies for a course of study will be called cadets and midshipmen
and will be accountable to policies and procedures that govern attendance and will receive all
compensation commensurate with a U.S. citizen cadet or midshipman. Foreign students will not
take the oath of office, are at no time considered to be serving on active duty in the Military
Services, and will not be eligible for nor offered a commission in a Military Service upon
satisfactory completion of their academy course of study nor be eligible to be called to active
duty if disenrolled.

cost of education. Those costs attributable directly to educating a person at an academy under
regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned and approved by
the ASD(M&RA) and USD(C)/CFO. Such costs include a reasonable charge for the provided
education, books, supplies, room, board, transportation, and other miscellaneous items furnished
at government expense. Excluded are the costs for cadet or midshipman pay and allowances in
accordance with section 203 of Reference (r), uniforms, military training, and support for
nonacademic military operations.

dependency. Any person for whom an individual has a legally recognized obligation to provide
support, including but not limited to spouse and biological, adoptive, or stepchildren.

disenrollment. The voluntary or involuntary termination of a cadet or midshipman from one of
the academies.

excess leave. Leave granted that exceeds accrued and advance leave and for which the Service
member is not entitled to pay and allowances. Generally, a negative leave balance at the time of
release from active military duty, discharge, first extension of an enlistment, desertion, or death
shall be considered excess leave regardless of the authority under which the leave resulting in the
negative balance was granted.

hazing. Any unauthorized assumption of authority by a cadet or midshipman whereby another
cadet or midshipman suffers or is exposed to any cruelty, indignity, humiliation, oppression, or
the deprivation or abridgment of any right. The Secretaries of the Military Departments or


Change 1, 11/01/2023                            28                            GLOSSARY
                                                             DoDI 1322.22, September 24, 2015


academy superintendents may issue regulations that augment this definition to amplify or clarify
local guidelines.

honor code (concept). A prescribed standard of ethical behavior applicable to cadets or
midshipmen, as determined by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned.

MSO. A commitment of military service for a specified period of time.




Change 1, 11/01/2023                           29                           GLOSSARY
