                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 3020.51
                                                                                   June 23, 2011
                                                   Incorporating Change 2, Effective July 9, 2020

                                                                                        USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:      Intelligence Support to the Defense Critical Infrastructure Program (DCIP)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01 (Reference
(a)) and pursuant to DoDD 3020.40 and DoD Instruction (DoDI) 3020.45 (References (b) and
(c)), this Instruction establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures for
intelligence support to the DCIP.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands
(CCMDs), the Office of the Inspector General of the DoD, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. The Defense Intelligence Enterprise (hereinafter referred to in this Instruction as “the
Enterprise”) shall provide timely intelligence and counterintelligence support to the DCIP.
Responsibilities and procedures for counterintelligence support to the DCIP shall be executed in
accordance with DoDI 5240.19 (Reference (d)).

    b. Intelligence collection, processing, retention, and dissemination in support of the DCIP
efforts shall be conducted in accordance with the National Intelligence Priorities Framework
pursuant to Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 204 (Reference (e)).
                                                                      DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

    c. DCIP-related threat assessments will be produced at the lowest possible classification
level and made accessible to all DoD Components and DISLAs through existing Enterprise
processes, procedures, systems, and architectures to the greatest extent possible.

    d. DCIP-related threat assessments shall be shared with other Defense Intelligence and
Counterintelligence Components, the national Intelligence Community (IC), other relevant
Federal agencies, and civilian law enforcement officials, as appropriate, in accordance with the
need to protect intelligence sources and methods and with the provisions of Director of Central
Intelligence Directive 8/1 (Reference (f)) and ICD 501 (Reference (g)). All sharing of
information, data, research, and analysis shall adhere to the requirements and restrictions
imposed by DoD 5400.11-R (Reference (h)), DoD Manual 5240.01 (Reference (i)), all other
applicable DoD policies, Federal law, Presidential directives, Executive orders, and Director of
National Intelligence (DNI) issuances.

    e. All intelligence and intelligence-related activities in support of the DCIP shall adhere to
Federal law, Presidential directives, Executive orders, and DNI and DoD policies. DoD
personnel shall conduct authorized intelligence and intelligence-related activities in a manner
that protects the privacy and civil liberties of U.S. persons. All intelligence and intelligence-
related activities supporting the DCIP shall conform to DoDD 5240.01 (Reference (j)) and
References (i) and (h).

5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This administrative change updates:

   a. The title of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) in accordance with Public Law 116-92
(Reference (l)), also known as the “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020.”

  b. Administrative changes in accordance with current standards of the Office of the Chief
Management Officer of the Department of Defense.




Change 2, 7/9/2020                               2
                                                              DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective June 23, 2011.



                                            Michael G. Vickers
                                            Under Secretary of Defense
                                            for Intelligence
Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 2, 7/9/2020                          3
                                                                DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I&S)),”
      October 24, 2014, as amended
(b)   DoD Directive 3020.40, “Mission Assurance (MA),” November 29, 2016
(c)   DoD Instruction 3020.45, “Defense Critical Infrastructure Program (DCIP) Management,”
      April 21, 2008
(d)   DoD Instruction 5240.19, “Counterintelligence Support to the Defense Critical
      Infrastructure Program,” January 31, 2014, as amended
(e)   Intelligence Community Directive 204, “Roles and Responsibilities for the National
      Intelligence Priorities Framework,” September 13, 2007
(f)   Director of Central Intelligence Directive 8/1, “Intelligence Community Policy on
      Intelligence Information Sharing,” June 4, 2004
(g)   Intelligence Community Directive 501, “Discovery and Dissemination or Retrieval of
      Information Within the Intelligence Community,” January 21, 2009
(h)   DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(i)   DoD Manual 5240.01, “Procedures Governing the Conduct of DoD Intelligence
      Activities,” August 8, 2016
(j)   DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(k)   DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(l)   Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
      December 20, 2019




Change 2, 7/9/2020                           4                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(I&S). The USD(I&S), pursuant to References (a), (b), and (c), shall:

   a. Establish policy for intelligence support to the DCIP.

  b. Oversee policies, plans, and programs, to include policies and issuances of DoD
Components, for intelligence support to the DCIP.

    c. Oversee implementation of this Instruction and develop additional direction and guidance
as necessary to provide intelligence support to the DCIP.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). The Director, DIA, pursuant to
DoDD 5105.21 (Reference (k)), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), and
in addition to the responsibilities in sections 9 and 10 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Pursuant to Reference (b), appoint the Critical Infrastructure Assurance Officer (CIAO)
for the Defense Infrastructure Intelligence Sector, under the authority of the Director, DIA, to be
the primary intelligence advisor for the DCIP. In this capacity, the Intelligence Sector CIAO
shall:

      (1) Plan, integrate, coordinate, direct, synchronize, and manage intelligence support to
the DCIP.

        (2) Represent the intelligence interests and equities of, and provide intelligence support
to, the CIAOs of the Defense Infrastructure Defense Industrial Base (DIB), Financial Services,
Health Affairs, and Personnel Sectors in all matters pertaining to the implementation and
execution of this Instruction.

   b. Establish and chair the DCIP intelligence working group (IWG). (See Enclosure 3.)

    c. Pursuant to U.S. laws and DoD issuances, and within the legal authority granted to the
DoD and subject to limitations on collection, retention, and dissemination of information on U.S.
persons, coordinate with other appropriate Federal agencies, such as the Department of
Homeland Security, regarding intelligence matters on defense critical infrastructure (DCI), in
accordance with References (c), (h), (i), and (j).

    d. Triennially, or more frequently if required, and in accordance with the Director, DIA’s
all-source intelligence analysis responsibilities produce or direct the production of a global
baseline assessment of the threats to DCI that address, at a minimum, those topic areas identified
in paragraph 2.a of Enclosure 3 and subject to Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P))
priorities. Ensure triennial updates capture all relevant intelligence collected or produced since



Change 2, 7/9/2020                               5                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

the previous assessment. Make this assessment accessible to all DoD Components and DISLAs
via existing intelligence channels. Where such channels do not exist, the assessments will be
disseminated under the provisions of subparagraph 2.a.(2) of this enclosure.

    e. Within 90 days of the publication of a triennial DCIP threat assessment, identify all
knowledge gaps and consolidate into a single DCIP intelligence collection requirement.
Collection will be conducted in accordance with priorities established by the National
Intelligence Priorities Framework.

    f. Produce, triennially or more frequently if required, a defense critical infrastructure threat
assessment (DCITA) for each defense critical asset (DCA) addressing, at a minimum, the topics
identified in section 4 of Enclosure 3. Where multiple DCAs are collocated on a single
installation, a single installation baseline threat assessment may be produced, provided individual
differences from the baseline are identified for each DCA, as appropriate. Completed
assessments will be provided to the appropriate Military Department, Defense Agency, or
DISLA and the Office of the USD(P).

   g. Within 90 days of the production of a DCITA for a DCA, identify all knowledge gaps for
consolidation into a single DCIP intelligence collection requirement. Collection will be
conducted in accordance with priorities established by the National Intelligence Priorities
Framework.

    h. In response to a validated requirement for ad-hoc finished intelligence production, prepare
or task the appropriate producer to prepare a finished intelligence assessment in response to the
requirement. Ensure that the major findings of this assessment are incorporated into all
subsequent triennial updates, as appropriate.

    i. Annually, or more frequently as required, issue a standing, all-source collection
requirement to address the intelligence gaps identified by DoD Components, DISLAs, and
intelligence production elements.


3. USD(P). The USD(P) shall:

   a. Provide a representative in observer status to the DCIP IWG.

  b. Annually, or more frequently if required, provide the Director, DIA, through the
USD(I&S), a statement of DoD priority intelligence requirements (PIRs) in support of the DCIP.

    c. Consolidate DoD Component and DISLA requirements for ad-hoc intelligence production
related to critical infrastructure responsibilities and provide them to the Director, DIA, through
the USD(I&S).

    d. Advise the Director, DIA, of policy, program, or process changes in the DCIP that may
affect intelligence support.




Change 2, 7/9/2020                               6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

   e. Annually, or more frequently as required, provide the approved DCA list to the Director,
DIA, through the USD(I&S). This list shall be used for prioritizing intelligence support to the
DCIP, subject to USD(P) priorities.

    f. In coordination with the USD(I&S), the Military Departments, and the CJCS, using
existing communications channels, assess and recommend improvements to ensure the timely
dissemination of DCI-related threat warnings to DoD Components, DISLAs, and other
authorized activities as appropriate.

   g. In coordination with the USD(I&S), advise the Director, DIA, of policy, program, or
process changes in the Defense Infrastructure Space Sector that may affect intelligence support.


4. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L), in coordination with the USD(I&S), shall
advise the Director, DIA, of policy, program, process, or operational changes in the DIB,
logistics, public works, or transportation infrastructures that may affect intelligence support.


5. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY (DLA). The Director, DLA, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L) and in addition to the responsibilities in
sections 9 and 10 of this enclosure, shall, through DLA’s internal intelligence element, provide
intelligence support to the CIAO of the Defense Infrastructure Logistics Sector.


6. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R), in coordination with the USD(I&S), shall advise the Director,
DIA, of policy, program, process, or operational changes in the health affairs or personnel
infrastructures that may affect intelligence support.


7. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). The USD(C)/CFO, in coordination with the
USD(I&S), shall advise the Director, DIA, of policy, program, process, or operational changes in
the financial services infrastructure that may affect intelligence support.


8. DoD CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (DOD CIO). The DoD CIO, in coordination with
the USD(I&S), shall advise the Director, DIA, of policy, program, process, or operational
changes in the DoD information enterprise, which includes Global Information Grid (GIG)
infrastructures that may affect intelligence support.


9. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS AND DISLAs. The Heads of the DoD Components
and DISLAs, in support of their assigned critical infrastructure responsibilities, shall identify




Change 2, 7/9/2020                                7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

subjects for which ad-hoc intelligence production is required. They shall provide such
requirements to the USD(P) through appropriate reporting channels.


10. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND DIRECTORS OF
DEFENSE AGENCIES, AND DoD FIELD ACTIVITIES. Secretaries of the Military
Departments and Directors of Defense Agencies, and DoD Field Activities, in addition to the
responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Designate an office of primary responsibility (OPR) within their intelligence component
to coordinate DCIP-related intelligence activities.

   b. Provide representational membership to the DCIP IWG. (See Enclosure 3.)

    c. Provide PIRs related to warnings of impending threats to DCI to their organic or
supporting intelligence element watch center. These PIRs shall be provided annually, or more
frequently as required, in conjunction with the most recent internal list of DCI.

    d. Ensure staff elements responsible for critical infrastructure share DCI-related threats,
indications, and warnings with the appropriate members of the DCIP community.


11. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY, The Secretary of the Army, in addition to the
responsibilities in sections 9 and 10 of this enclosure, shall direct the Commander, U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) to provide intelligence support, through USACE’s internal
intelligence element, to the CIAO of the Defense Infrastructure Public Works Sector.


12. CJCS. The CJCS, in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Integrate intelligence support to the DCIP into joint planning, programs, systems,
exercises, doctrine, strategies, policies, and architectures.

   b. Incorporate DCIP-related threat scenarios requiring coordination with intelligence
elements into joint training and exercises.


13. COMMANDERS OF THE CCMDS. The Commanders of the CCMDs, through the CJCS
as appropriate, and in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Designate an OPR within their intelligence component to coordinate DCIP-related
intelligence activities.

   b. Provide representational membership to the DCIP IWG. (See Enclosure 3.)




Change 2, 7/9/2020                               8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

   c. Ensure that staff elements and components responsible for critical infrastructure share
DCI-related threats, indications, and warnings with the appropriate members of the DCIP
community.

   d. Incorporate DCIP-related threat scenarios requiring coordination with intelligence
elements into joint training and exercises.


14. COMMANDERS OF THE GEOGRAPHIC CCMDS. The Commanders of the geographic
CCMDs, through the CJCS as appropriate, and in addition to the responsibilities in sections 9
and 13 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Triennially or more frequently if required, and in accordance with the Defense
Intelligence Analysis Program, produce an area of responsibility (AOR)-specific supplement to
the DIA-produced, global baseline assessment of the threats to DCI that addresses, at a
minimum, those topic areas identified in paragraph 3.a. of Enclosure 3, subject to the USD(P)
priorities. Ensure triennial updates capture all relevant intelligence collected or produced since
the previous supplement. Make these supplements accessible to all DoD Components and
DISLAs via existing intelligence channels. Where such channels do not exist, they will be
disseminated under the provisions of subparagraph 2.a.(2) of this enclosure.

   b. Within 90 days of the publication of the triennial, AOR-specific DCIP threat assessment
supplement, identify all existing knowledge gaps and forward to the Director, DIA, for
consolidation into a single DCIP intelligence collection requirement.

    c. Address intelligence requirements and production responsibilities pertinent to critical
infrastructure-related responsibilities in the intelligence support plan for their respective theater
campaign plans.

   d. Identify PIRs related to warnings of impending threats to DCI within their respective
AORs, and ensure these PIRs are provided to their organic intelligence element watch center.
These PIRs shall be provided annually, or more frequently as required, in conjunction with the
most recent internal list of DCI.


15. COMMANDER, U.S. STRATEGIC COMMAND (USSTRATCOM). The Commander,
USSTRATCOM, in addition to the responsibilities in sections 9 and 13 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Through USSTRATCOM’s internal intelligence element, provide intelligence support to
the CIAO of the Defense Infrastructure Space Sector.

    b. Direct the Commander, U.S. Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM), to provide, through
USCYBERCOM’s internal intelligence element, intelligence support to the CIAO of the Defense
Infrastructure GIG Sector and Defense Information Systems Agency.




Change 2, 7/9/2020                                9                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

16. COMMANDER, U.S. TRANSPORTATION COMMAND (USTRANSCOM). The
Commander, USTRANSCOM, in addition to the responsibilities in sections 9 and 13 of this
enclosure, shall, through USTRANSCOM’s internal intelligence element, provide intelligence
support to the CIAO of the Defense Infrastructure Transportation Sector.




Change 2, 7/9/2020                           10                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. DCIP IWG

   a. The DCIP IWG shall consist of an executive steering panel and an action officer panel
with membership consisting of military members or full-time or permanent part-time civilian
employees.

       (1) The executive steering panel shall consist of those general or flag officers or their
equivalents appointed by the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the Directors of Defense
Agencies and DoD Field Activities, and the Commanders of the CCMDs.

        (2) The action officer panel shall consist of those representatives within the Enterprise
and the internal intelligence elements of the CCMDs, the Military Departments, the Defense
Agencies, and the DoD Field Activities responsible for DCIP-related intelligence activities.
Defense infrastructure sectors whose parent organizations lack an internal intelligence element
shall be represented at the working group by the CIAO of the Intelligence Sector of the DCIP.

   b. The executive steering panel will meet annually, or more frequently as required.

   c. The action-officer panel will meet quarterly, or more frequently as required.

   d. The DCIP IWG shall serve as the primary coordination mechanism for intelligence
support to the DCIP.


2. GLOBAL BASELINE ASSESSMENT OF THE THREATS TO DCI

   a. The DIA-produced triennial assessment of the threats to DCI shall include, at a minimum
and subject to the USD(P) priorities:

       (1) Foreign intelligence threat to DCI.

       (2) Insider threat.

       (3) Foreign nuclear, biological, chemical, and radiological threat to DCI.

       (4) Emerging technologies threat to DCI.

       (5) Cyber threat to DCI.

       (6) Foreign special operations forces threat to DCI.




Change 2, 7/9/2020                               11                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

       (7) Global terrorism threat to DCI.

       (8) Foreign threats to space-borne DCI.

       (9) Hazards posed by epidemics and pandemics.

    b. Production tasking in support of this assessment will be provided via Community On-Line
Intelligence System for End Users (COLISEUM), or via such tasking mechanism in use within
the Enterprise at that time, by the CIAO for the Intelligence Sector of the DCIP.


3. AOR-SPECIFIC THREAT ASSESSMENT SUPPLEMENTS

    a. The geographic CCMD-produced, AOR-specific supplement to the DIA-produced
triennial DCIP threat assessment shall include, at a minimum and subject to USD(P) and
Combatant Commander priorities:

       (1) Regional terrorist threat to DCI.

        (2) Conventional military threat to DCI as posed by those Priority 1, 2, or 3 countries as
established by the National Intelligence Priorities Framework.

       (3) Hazards posed to DCI from natural disasters common to the AOR.

       (4) Host-nation government interference, as appropriate.

       (5) Host-nation civil population events, such as protests, strikes, and unrest.

       (6) Potential insider threats, such as the leaking of classified information.

    b. Triennial updates will capture all relevant intelligence information collected or produced
since the preceding supplement.

   c. Production tasking in support of this assessment will be provided via COLISEUM, or via
such tasking mechanism in use within the DIE at that time, by the CIAO for the Intelligence
Sector of the DCIP.


4. DEFENSE CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE THREAT ASSESSMENTS. The DIA-
produced triennial Defense Critical Infrastructure Threat Assessments shall address, at a
minimum and subject to USD(P) priorities, the threats to each DCA individually arising from:

   a. Intelligence collection.

   b. Chemical weapon attacks.




Change 2, 7/9/2020                              12                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                               DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

   c. Biological weapon attacks.

   d. Nuclear weapon attacks.

   e. Radiological weapon attacks.

   f. Electromagnetic spectrum attacks.

   g. Cyber attacks.

   h. Kinetic attacks.




Change 2, 7/9/2020                        13              ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011

                                          GLOSSARY

                     PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AOR              area of responsibility


CCMD             Combatant Command
CIAO             Critical Infrastructure Assurance Officer
COLISEUM         Community On-Line Intelligence System for End Users


DCA              defense critical asset
DCI              defense critical infrastructure
DCIP             Defense Critical Infrastructure Program
DCITA            defense critical infrastructure threat assessment
DIA              Defense Intelligence Agency
DIB              defense industrial base
DISLA            Defense Infrastructure Sector Lead Agent
DLA              Defense Logistics Agency
DNI              Director of National Intelligence
DoD CIO          DoD Chief Information Officer
DoDD             DoD Directive
DoDI             DoD Instruction


GIG              Global Information Grid

IC               Intelligence Community
ICD              Intelligence Community Directive
IWG              intelligence working group


OPR              office of primary responsibility


PIR              Priority Intelligence Requirement


USCYBERCOM U.S. Cyber Command
USD(AT&L)  Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics



Change 2, 7/9/2020                           14                                     GLOSSARY
                                                                      DoDI 3020.51, June 23, 2011


USD(C)/CFO          Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                    Department Of Defense
USD(I&S)            Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
USD(P)              Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)            Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


USSTRATCOM          U.S. Strategic Command
USTRANSCOM          U.S. Transportation Command


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

ad-hoc intelligence production. Production of finished, all-source intelligence outside the
periodic, scheduled production established by this Instruction.

COLISEUM. An analysis requirements management tool used throughout the DIE for tasking
and managing requirements for finished intelligence production.

DCA. Defined in Reference (b).

DCI. Defined in Reference (b).

DCIP. Defined in Reference (b).

Defense CI Component. Defined in Reference (a).

Defense Intelligence Component. Defined in Reference (a).

Defense Intelligence Enterprise. The intelligence combat support agencies, the intelligence
elements of the Military Services and CCMDs, and DoD intelligence, counterintelligence, and
security organizations (e.g., Defense Security Service).

finished intelligence. The product resulting from the collection, processing, integration, analysis,
evaluation, and interpretation of available information concerning foreign countries or areas.

intelligence collection requirement. An established intelligence need, validated against the
appropriate allocation of intelligence resources to fulfill the PIRs and other intelligence needs of
an intelligence consumer.

PIR. A prioritized requirement a commander or decision maker has stated in the process of
planning and decision making. PIRs are used to determine and prioritize intelligence collection
and analytic resources in support of the mission.


Change 2, 7/9/2020                               15                                    GLOSSARY
