                              Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE
                                                                             NUMBER 4515.12
                                                                               January 15, 2010

                                                                                        ASD(LA)

SUBJECT: DoD Support for Travel of Members and Employees of Congress

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 4515.12 (Reference (a)) to update policy for DoD
support for travel of members and employees of Congress and to assign responsibility for
approving and coordinating requests for transportation of members and employees of Congress.

   b. Formally establishes and governs the execution of a congressional travel program
comprised of congressional delegations (CODELs), staff delegations (STAFFDELs), and
governor delegations (GOVDELs).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that support for approved travel of members and employees of
Congress shall be provided on an economical basis upon request of Congress pursuant to law, or
where necessary to carry out DoD duties and responsibilities. The DoD support for travel of
members and employees of Congress shall be based on:

   a. The necessity to present Congress with the Department of Defense’s legislative program
and to respond to inquiries from and to cooperate in investigations by Congress regarding the
Department.
                                                                DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

    b. The contribution that DoD support for travel of members and employees of Congress may
make to the defense effort and to the exercise by Congress of its responsibilities in connection
therewith.

     c. Prudent utilization of DoD transportation resources. Military airlift shall not be used for
CODELs if commercial airline or aircraft (including charter) is reasonably available, i.e., able to
meet the traveler’s departure and/or arrival requirements in a 24-hour period, unless highly
unusual circumstances present a clear and present danger; an emergency exists; use of military
airlift is more cost effective than commercial air; or other compelling operational considerations
make commercial transportation unacceptable.

    d. Ensuring travel of members and employees of Congress is sponsored by the Department
of Defense only where the purpose of the travel is of primary interest to and bears a substantial
relationship to programs or activities of the Department of Defense and is not solely for the
purpose of engendering goodwill or obtaining possible future benefits.

   e. Ensuring, insofar as practicable, that the Military Departments have equal opportunity, as
among each other, to participate in support for travel of members and employees of Congress.

   f. Ensuring, insofar as practicable, that support for travel of members and employees of
Congress is provided on a joint basis by the relevant DoD Components.

   g. Ensuring that the use of military carriers by members and employees of Congress
complies with transportation policies prescribed by the Secretary of Defense.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs (ASD(LA))
shall provide oversight of and approve support by the DoD Components of travel by members
and employees of Congress to assure compliance with the policies and guidelines prescribed in
this Directive. Each of the DoD Components shall submit reports regarding support for travel of
members and employees of Congress, and the cost thereof, to the ASD(LA) in such form and
manner as he or she may from time to time prescribe.


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The report submitted to the ASD(LA) has been
approved and assigned Report Control Symbol DD-LA(AR)2370 in accordance with DoD
8910.1-M (Reference (b)).


7. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Directive is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.




                                                 2
                                                        DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010



8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. DoD Support for Travel of Members and Employees of Congress
   Glossary




                                           3
                                                                               DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

                                                   ENCLOSURE 1

                                                  REFERERENCES


(a)      DoD Directive 4515.12, “Department of Defense Support for Travel of Members and
         Employees of the Congress,” December 12, 1964 (hereby canceled)
(b)      DoD 8910.1-M, “Department of Defense Procedures for Management of Information
         Requirements,” June 30, 1998
(c)      Section 1108(g) of title 31, United States Code
(d)      Chapter 7, Part U, paragraph U7750 of Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume I,
         “Uniformed Service Members,” current edition
(e)      Chapter 7, Part I, paragraph C7400 B of Joint Travel Regulations, Volume II, “Department
         of Defense Civilian Personnel,” current edition
(f)      Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs Memorandum,
         “Congressional Funeral Support Plan,” May 6, 1986 1
(g)      ASD(LA) letter dated February 7, 2007, to the Speaker of the House regarding policy
         guidance on Speaker Shuttle airlift support1
(h)      DoD 4515.13-R, “Air Transportation Eligibility,” November 1994
(i)      Section 2166 of title 10, United States Code
(j)      U.S. House of Representatives travel guidelines dated February 20091
(k)      U.S. Senate travel guidelines dated March 9, 20071
(l)      Office of Management and Budget Circular A-126, “Improving the Management and Use
         of Government Aircraft,” May 22 1992
(m)      Commander, Multi-National Force Iraq, and Ambassador, Embassy Baghdad,
         “Memorandum of Understanding Between U.S. Embassy Baghdad and Multi-National
         Force-Iraq Regarding Congressional Travel,” July 14, 2008




1
    Copies are available by contacting the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs.

                                                             4
                                                                                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                        DoD SUPPORT FOR TRAVEL OF MEMBERS
                            AND EMPLOYEES OF CONGRESS


1. PLANNING AND SUPPORT

   a. Planning, coordinating, and executing DoD support for CODELs, STAFFDELs, and
GOVDELs requires detailed, deliberate, and proactive planning by OSD and the Military
Departments with Congress, other Federal agencies, and the DoD Components that members and
employees of Congress visit.

    b. To fulfill these requirements, the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Legislative Affairs (OASD(LA)) will serve as the DoD primary point of contact on all matters
regarding CODEL, STAFFDEL, or GOVDEL travel. OASD(LA) is responsible for
communicating and/or coordinating all issues between DoD Components, the Speaker of the
House of Representatives, Senate leadership, and other members regarding travel, including
aircraft assignments, available dates for travel, and composition of the trip.

    c. Responsibility for military escorts on Secretary of Defense-invited or committee-
authorized congressional or staff delegations will be assigned to a specific Military Department
by OASD(LA). These escorts will conduct detailed trip planning (e.g., itinerary development)
and coordination with members and employees of Congress and come from the legislative and/or
budget liaison offices of the Military Departments. During coordination with members and staff,
military escorts will ensure they do not create unrealistic expectations of guaranteed trip
approval by the Department of Defense or exceptions to policy granted by other agencies.
Additionally, the Department of Defense has a finite pool of airlift assets available for
congressional travel. Aircraft are allocated by the OASD(LA). Until aircraft are formally
assigned to a trip, the legislative and/or budget liaison escorts should take every step to ensure
they do not create expectations that a DoD Very Important Person (VIP) aircraft will be
assigned. The Services should not attempt to provide other aircraft to fill these requests when
OSD assets are not available unless requested by the ASD(LA). Doing so encroaches on the
authority of OSD to assign aircraft, interferes with prioritization, and may create unrealistic
expectations.

    d. To maximize air support to CODELs, OASD(LA) shall closely coordinate with the
Executive Airlift Scheduling Authority (EASA) on aircraft availability to ensure the efficient use
of DoD VIP and special air mission (SAM) assets. The OASD(LA) will ensure that all requests
for distinguished visitor (DV) airlift:

       (1) Are clearly prioritized.

       (2) Meet the number of member requirements listed in paragraph 1.h. of this enclosure.

       (3) Do not exceed 10 days (counted as 24-hour periods).

                                                5
                                                                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010



   e. To the maximum extent possible, scheduled maintenance for the DoD DV airlift fleet
should be conducted during periods when congressional travel is expected to be lightest. In
addition to projecting these and other travel periods, OASD(LA) will deliver and update (when
necessary) the congressional calendar to EASA to aid decision making.

    f. Travel on military aircraft is a premium mode of travel involving high costs and limited
resources. When commercial air is unavailable and military airlift must be used, every effort
shall be made to minimize military airlift costs. In that regard, the type of aircraft used shall be
based on minimum cost and size necessary to satisfy the mission requirement. The Department
of Defense will not schedule training missions whose primary purpose is to accommodate
members of Congress and staff, nor the travel of senior DoD officials.

   g. In the case where military airlift is required, the OASD(LA) will request aircraft for a
CODEL based on the number of members of Congress, military escorts, and aircraft security
team personnel (if required).

    h. With the exception of military airlift provided to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives at the direction of the White House, dedicated military airlift from Andrews Air
Force Base (AFB), Maryland, to outside the continental United States (OCONUS) will not be
used for parties with less than three members of Congress. Due to the high costs, large military
aircraft (15 or more passenger capability) will be approved only for groups of 5 or more
members of Congress.

     i. In the case where members of Congress or congressional employees travel via commercial
means by the authority of section 1108(g) of title 31, United States Code (U.S.C.)
(Reference (c)), legislative and/or budget liaison escorts accompanying the trip will be
authorized and reimbursed for official travel, including transportation costs, at the same class of
service used by the member or employee of Congress who is being accompanied. This authority
is further covered under Joint Federal Travel Regulation Volume I, Chapter 7, Part U, paragraph
U7750, and Joint Travel Regulation Volume II, Chapter 7, Part I, paragraph C7400 B
(References (d) and (e)).


2. CATEGORIES AND CONDITIONS OF SUPPORT. The ASD(LA) approves and prioritizes
all requests for military air support for travel (originating either in the continental United States
(CONUS) or OCONUS) for members and employees of Congress, and other delegations
sponsored by the Secretary of Defense, except for missions within the approval authority of the
Secretaries of the Military Departments (as specified in this Directive) and the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. Support may be provided for travel of members and employees of
Congress and is classified in three categories.

   a. Non-Sponsored Reimbursable Travel (i.e., Authority Within a Committee Letter)

        (1) A request for travel of members and employees of Congress without reimbursement
shall be granted when:

                                                  6
                                                                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010



            (a) The chair of the congressional committee on which the member or employee
serves or the Senate and the House leadership submits a written request to the Secretary of
Defense.

            (b) The request indicates the identities of the individuals for whom travel is requested
and the itinerary desired to be followed.

           (c) The request states that the purpose of the travel is of primary interest to the
Department of Defense and that the expenditure of funds by the Department of Defense is
authorized in accordance with Reference (c). If such expenditure is not so authorized, the
request must specify such other provision of law that authorizes DoD expenditure.

            (d) The ASD(LA) will approve or disapprove the request. If approved, OASD(LA)
shall assign the responsibility for travel to one of the Military Departments or to the OSD
legislative liaison representative as he or she may deem appropriate in each case. When
responsibility is retained by the OSD, the ASD(LA) shall assign responsibility to one or more of
the Military Departments to provide the necessary support.

       (2) Requests for support without reimbursement for travel of an official CODEL in
connection with the funeral of a member of Congress who dies in office shall be granted if the
request is made to the Secretary of Defense, by the President of the Senate, Speaker of the House
of Representatives, or designated representatives. The ASD(LA) shall assign the responsibility
for providing such support to a DoD Component.

           (a) The ASD(LA) may authorize military airlift from Andrews AFB to the funeral
location and return for CODELs. Due to the scarcity of airlift resources, airlift requested for
Operation PLAN TRIBUTE shall be sized to efficiently and cost effectively transport the
members of Congress attending the funeral and will not exceed 1 day.

            (b) The DoD Component assigned to provide support for Operation PLAN
TRIBUTE (Reference (f)) will coordinate manifest lists, itineraries, and other arrangements with
the Office of the House or Senate Sergeant at Arms, as appropriate. Authorization letters from
these offices, signed by House or Senate leadership, will clearly identify those traveling as
members and employees of Congress, those traveling at no additional cost to the U.S.
Government (USG) for protocol purposes, and those travelers required to reimburse the USG.
Neither the Department of Defense nor the Military Departments have authority to pay for meals
or incidentals for travelers who are not members or employees of Congress.

        (3) When congressional committees or members find it essential while abroad to request
travel in aircraft allocated to the attaches or military missions, such trips may be authorized by
OASD(LA) with concurrence of the Defense Attaché if:

           (a) Commercial facilities are not available.




                                                  7
                                                                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

          (b) The use of the attaché or mission aircraft does not interfere with its normally
assigned mission.

            (c) The purpose of the trip is specifically indicated by the chair of the committee or
subcommittee or member as essential to the mission of the committee, subcommittee, or member
and as of primary interest to the Department of Defense. The Military Department concerned
shall submit a report of each trip flown in attaché or mission aircraft to the ASD(LA). The report
shall indicate the names of passengers carried and the duration, destination, and purpose of the
trip.

           (d) Fund cites are identified and passed for flying hour costs (if required).

    b. Sponsored, Non-Reimbursable Travel (i.e., Authority Within a Secretary’s Invitation).
The Secretary of Defense or the Secretaries of the Military Departments may extend invitations
for sponsored non-reimbursable travel within the limitations prescribed in this enclosure. The
Secretaries of the Military Departments are delegated the authority unilaterally to extend
invitations to members and employees of Congress for sponsored, non-reimbursable, single
department-related travel within the 50 United States. Invitations extended by the Secretaries of
the Military Departments are subject to the limitations necessary to carry out the policies stated
in this Directive as the Secretary of Defense may from time to time prescribe.

        (1) Visits by members and employees of Congress to Combatant Commanders may be
conducted on a non-reimbursable basis under Secretary of Defense invitation. Because funding
for Secretary of Defense-invited travel comes from the budgets of the Military Departments,
travel specifically designed to visit Combatant Commanders will be submitted to OASD(LA) for
approval prior to inviting members or employees of Congress. Upon ASD(LA)’s approval,
travel will be assigned to a specific Military Department based on the Department having the
preponderance of the itinerary. Additionally, OASD(LA) will exercise oversight of the conduct
of all congressional travel (i.e., level of service, composition of trips, accounting practices) to
standardize execution across all Military Departments.

        (2) Newly elected members and their employees may travel on a non-reimbursable basis
following the appropriate swearing-in ceremony. If not traveling under the authority provided by
Reference (c), newly elected members may travel at the invitation of the Secretary of Defense.
Members will be considered newly elected until the conclusion of the Congress in which they
first became sitting members.

         (3) Orientation flights for members and employees of Congress may be conducted on a
non-reimbursable basis. Orientation flights are defined as continuous flights in DoD-owned
aircraft performed within the local flying area and terminating at the point of origin. Orientation
flights may be provided to members and employees of Congress to familiarize them with topics
that fall within their scope of responsibilities (capabilities demonstrations, airspace and/or
training range tours, etc.). Organizations requesting authorization from OASD(LA) for
orientation flights shall bear the non-flight related costs and should ensure the flight can be
accomplished within allocated flying hour funding and that passengers have been carefully
selected to ensure that the greatest benefit to understanding DoD missions shall result from such

                                                 8
                                                                                   ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

orientation flights. Where National Guard units are requested to perform orientation flights, the
National Guard Bureau shall provide documentation from the appropriate State adjutant general
of their concurrence with the flight and certification the flight falls within the organizations
established flying hour program. Requests for orientation flights to be conducted as point-to-
point travel for such groups or individuals must be approved under provisions in DoD 4515.13-R
(Reference (h)).

        (4) The Department of Defense may support visits by the Service Academy Boards of
Visitors on a non-reimbursable basis.

            (a) Under the provisions of title 10, U.S.C. (Reference (i)), members of Congress and
certain other Presidential appointees are named to serve as members of the Board of Visitors to
the military academies. This is to include Board of Visitor Members for the Western
Hemisphere Institute of Security Cooperation, which is governed under section 2166 of
Reference (i). These board members are also required by Reference (i) to visit the specific
academies either annually and/or biannually as pertains to that Service’s published requirements,
and report thereon to the President of the United States. Inasmuch as these visits are a matter of
statutory requirement, travel by members of Congress and the Presidential appointees to the
Board of Visitors to and from an academy is authorized under invitation of the Secretary of
Defense.

            (b) Reference (i) allows Secretaries of the Military Departments to approve
additional trips, above and beyond those required by statute, to the military academies and
approve the Board to call in advisers for consultation. Travel associated with these extra trips
and travel for non-board member advisers must be authorized by invitation and paid for by the
relevant Secretary of the Military Department.

        (5) Based on a Secretary of Defense invitation, GOVDELs may travel on a non-
reimbursable basis. State governors are considered elected officials, not civic leaders.
GOVDELs originate and terminate at Andrews AFB. The governor’s office will be responsible
for getting the governor to Andrews AFB at the designated day and time of departure and
meeting the governor upon his or her return. The GOVDEL will travel directly to and return
from the deployed location. In certain cases, Guardsmen from a specific governor’s State may
be mobilized and deployed OCONUS in title 10 status (Reference (i)). Governors wishing to
visit deployed National Guard troops should contact the National Guard Bureau, Public Affairs
(NGB-PA), and/or OASD(LA) to express their desire to travel on an upcoming GOVDEL.
Governor’s offices should be aware that GOVDELs are different from “Bosslift travel,” for
which the requests are routed through NGB-PA and approved by OSD Reserve Affairs,
Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve, (ESGR). Given limited resources in a combat zone
set aside to support these trips, invitations from the Secretary of Defense to GOVDELs for
official travel will normally be sent to a bi-partisan group of two to four interested governors for
the week-long trip. Staff, aides, and protective details for the governors may not travel with the
GOVDEL. The Adjutant Generals are not authorized to travel with the GOVDEL; however,
OASD(LA) will normally invite the Chief, NGB, to accompany as a subject matter expert.
Military aides and executive officers primarily supporting the Chief, National Guard Bureau
(NGB) or their representative, may not travel as part of the GOVDEL.

                                                 9
                                                                                   ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010



        (6) Members and employees of Congress who hold valid reserve status in the Army, the
Navy, the Air Force, or the Marine Corps may utilize military carriers in accordance with
existing policies of the respective Military Departments applicable to the reserve officer and
enlisted personnel of those departments.

    c. Sponsored, Reimbursable Travel (i.e., Media Travel). Media approved by Office of the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs and traveling with CODELs under the
authorities previously mentioned and pursuant to the applicable travel guidelines of the House of
Representatives and the Senate (References (j) and (k)) will reimburse the USG for travel-related
expenses prior to their departure.


3. NON-OFFICIAL PASSENGERS

    a. Spouse and/or Family Travel. Due to limited resources and the expense involved with the
use of military airlift for travel, spouses and family members of members and employees of
Congress will not accompany official delegation travel. In unique cases, when there is an
unquestionably official function in which the family member is actually to participate in an
official capacity or such travel is deemed in the national interest because of a diplomatic or
public relations benefit to the United States, ASD(LA) may approve an exception and authorize
the travel of one family member of the legislative branch to accompany the member on a
CODEL. This travel will be at no expense to the USG. Such approval of non-reimbursable
travel is limited to spouses, member designates, or an adult child (18 years of age and older) of
the member of Congress for those members who do not have spouses or those whose spouse is
unavailable (as stipulated in the committee and/or leadership letter). Children under 18 years of
age are not authorized travel on CODELs. Pursuant to House and Senate guidelines, the
Secretaries of the Military Departments may approve travel of spouses on Military Department
invites. Committee or leadership letters requesting additional travelers should contain the
travelers name and specify their relationship (spouse, member designate, adult child) to the
member they are accompanying.

        (1) Exception Requests. Requests for an exception for spouse and/or family member
travel must:

          (a) Be consistent with written travel guidelines set forth by the House of
Representatives and/or the U.S. Senate leadership and coordinated with OASD(LA).

           (b) Incur no additional cost to the USG.

            (c) Be provided in writing, including the national interest that the additional traveler
will be fulfilling while on the delegation.

       (2) Protocol Purpose Requests

           (a) Additional travelers required for protocol purposes may:

                                                 10
                                                                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010



               1. Engage in alternate local area activities during CODELs when the member is
engaged in official Government meetings.

                2. Be geographically separated from their members where military policy and/or
protocols restrict their entry (i.e., combat zones).

             (b) Spouses and/or family members required for protocol purposes will NOT:

                1. Charge the USG for costs associated with this separation, such as billeting, per
diem, etc.

                2. Travel on military airlift without the CODEL.

           (c) Under highly unusual circumstances such as unplanned or unanticipated schedule
changes, compelling mission requirements of the member sponsor, or aircraft maintenance
delays projected to last more than 48 hours, spouses and/or family members may return to
CONUS at Government expense in the most cost-effective manner available. Approval for this
deviation resides with the ASD(LA). All spouses and/or family members required for protocol
purposes must be annotated in committee or leadership authorization letters.

    b. Medical Personnel. The ASD(LA) and the Secretary of a Military Department may
authorize medical personnel to accompany a member of Congress with or without
reimbursement on either sponsored or non-sponsored travel where necessary for the health of the
member.

    c. State and Local Elected Officials. State and local elected officials, other than those listed
in paragraph 2.b.(5) are not authorized to travel with CODELs.


4. GENERAL INFORMATION

   a. Election Year Travel

         (1) Neither DoD assets nor DoD funds shall be used for campaign-related travel
(e.g., campaign events, district travel). Members of Congress may travel to military installations
to receive briefings, tours, or other DoD information during an election year as they otherwise
would do in the ordinary course of their duties and as approved by the ASD(LA). However,
candidates who visit military installations to conduct official business will not be allowed to
engage in any political campaign or election activity during the visit to the installation. Further,
when an elected official arrives or departs via military aircraft, the installation commander will
not authorize media coverage of the arrival and departure if the candidate’s itinerary includes
political campaign or election activity in the local community. Media will not be authorized to
travel on military aircraft with CODELs during election years.




                                                 11
                                                                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

       (2) In adherence to long-standing Senate and House of Representatives rules, members
of Congress and their employees who will not return in the next sitting Congress will not be
allowed to travel on either the earlier of the election dates or the date on which the chamber
declares itself adjourned indefinitely. Requests by CODELs that are comprised of members of
Congress who are subject to election will not be approved for a trip that departs prior to election
day and returns after election day.

    b. Department of State (DOS), Embassy, and Attaché Coordination. Close coordination
between the Departments of Defense and State is required to ensure the success of OCONUS
travel. OASD(LA) will serve as the DoD primary point of contact for coordinating overarching
issues with DOS regarding the Congressional Travel Program. OASD(LA) will disseminate
Embassy or DOS cables regarding travel restrictions and accommodations affecting upcoming
travel. Pursuant to regulations governing Ambassador or DOS DV travel on DoD aircraft,
members of Congress may request these parties travel with the CODEL and/or STAFFDELs
within their assigned countries. These requests will be included in applicable authorization
letters to the Secretary of Defense and will be approved and/or disapproved by OASD(LA).

   c. District or State Travel

        (1) Outside of the Speaker Shuttle, no funds will be made available by the Department of
Defense to pay the expenses of travel or subsistence for any trip made by any Senator or
Representative between Andrews AFB and their home State (in the case of a senator) or district
(in the case of a representative).

        (2) The origination point and termination point for all CODEL travel is Andrews AFB.
Members and employees of Congress are responsible for all costs and arrangements associated
with traveling from their State and/or district to begin CODEL travel. Exceptions for members
wishing to terminate their trip during intermediate stops on a CODEL must be spelled out in the
committee and/or leadership letter.

    d. Congressionally-Sponsored Commission Travel. Commissions established by Congress
under public law do not necessarily, by definition, qualify for support as a CODEL. The
Secretary of Defense, pursuant to applicable laws and regulations spelled out under the charter of
the specific commission, may extend travel invitations to the commission; however, this support
shall be coordinated through the Executive Secretary to the Secretary of Defense.

    e. Reimbursement Rates. For the circumstances where reimbursement is mandated in this
Directive, reimbursement rates to the Treasurer of the United States are set by Office of
Management and Budget Circular A-126 (Reference (l)). Long-standing policy for DoD senior
leaders and members and employees of Congress has set the rate of reimbursement at the full
coach fare. Specifically, this rate is defined as any coach fare available to the public between the
time that travel is planned with the legislative and/or budget liaison escort and when it occurs, so
long as the traveler satisfies any terms, conditions, or restrictions associated with that particular
fare.




                                                 12
                                                                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

    f. Additional Travelers on CODELs or STAFFDELs. On occasion, the Secretaries of the
Military Departments may authorize flag officers or civilian equivalents not assigned to
legislative and/or budget liaison positions to accompany CODELs, provided:

        (1) Space is available on the aircraft scheduled for the original CODEL. Due to limited
resources, the ASD(LA) will request aircraft based on the number of congressional members
traveling.

       (2) The flag officer or civilian equivalent must be specifically invited in writing by the
member or committee chairperson who will accompany the CODEL; written justification will be
required from the committee staff member(s) requesting travel of flag officers or civilian
equivalents on their STAFFDEL.

         (3) All members of the CODEL and/or STAFFDEL will observe Combatant Commander
restrictions (limited billeting, in theater transportation, etc.). These restrictions will not be
waived solely to accommodate the additional traveler.

        (4) The Military Department chief of legislative liaison or budget liaison sponsoring the
additional traveler will certify the traveler is a subject matter expert on some aspect of the
CODEL and has been briefed on OSD- and Service-specific legislative issues that may arise
prior to the trip. Service members accompanying the group may not bring spouses or dependents
as part of the CODEL. Military aides and executive officers primarily supporting the flag
officers may not travel as part of the CODEL.

        (5) In addition to the cases in paragraphs 4.f.(1) through (4), CODELs and STAFFDELs
may find it valuable to include subject matter experts who are USG employees to accompany the
group. In an effort to provide the CODEL and/or STAFFDEL leads control over who
accompanies the group, and consistent with the requirements for flag officers in paragraph 4.f.,
committee letters must include these “invitees” by name. The committee letter is not authorizing
travel by the executive branch, but rather is inviting the traveler to join the group. Thus, the
invited traveler is responsible for generating travel orders and ensuring funding as appropriate
for his or her specific organization.


5. SPECIAL TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS

    a. Travel to Contingency Operations. In order to allow for field examinations of
appropriation estimates under the authorities of Reference (c), the Secretary of Defense may
authorize members and employees of Congress to travel to an area where contingency operations
are being conducted. Unless specifically authorized by the ASD(LA), CODELs approved to
travel into these areas will travel via military aircraft. There is no protocol purpose for non-
official travelers in areas where contingency operations are being conducted. Thus, non-official
travelers (spouses, member designates, etc.) are not authorized to accompany CODELs in these
areas.




                                               13
                                                                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

        (1) Due to the inherent risk involved and the limited assets in a contingency operation
that can be dedicated to CODEL, STAFFDEL, or GOVDEL support, members and employees of
Congress and governors should expect certain restrictions on travel (e.g., group size and
composition, frequency and locations of visits, requirement to wear personal protective
equipment). Civilians other than members or employees of Congress may not travel with the
delegation to a contingency area unless there is a specific requirement for that individual from
the Combatant Commander or the individual is invited by the Secretary of Defense.

        (2) OASD(LA) will serve as liaison between the Combatant Commander, Department of
State, and OSD for prescribing congressional travel restrictions to contingency zones. Once
developed, OASD(LA) will disseminate these restrictions (e.g., Multi-National Forces-Iraq and
Embassy Baghdad Memorandum of Understanding (Reference (m)) for the Military Departments
and the members and employees of Congress. Because of the primacy of contingency
requirements, exceptions to these policies can be approved only with concurrence of
commanders in the field.

         (3) In order to protect the movement of a CODEL and all of the associated supporting
personnel in the contingency area, it is important that all members of the traveling party maintain
strict operational security. To this end, CODELs or STAFFDELs should not communicate (via
any means) their movements in advance of any trip, communicate their current locations, or
communicate future movements or method of movements while in the contingency area.
CODEL escorts, public affairs, or local commanders in theater will provide guidance for press
availability and on photography and videos during the relevant portion of the trip. The DoD goal
is to ensure members are offered the opportunity to present their initial observations of their trip
in an effective manner while ensuring the safety of everyone in the traveling party and those who
are supporting the group.

    b. Post-Disaster Recovery Surveys. In order to allow for field examinations of appropriation
estimates under the authorities of Reference (c) and to enable accurate surveys and decisions be
made on post-disaster recovery programs, the members and employees of Congress may make
requests for support to the Secretary of Defense to travel to areas affected by natural disasters.

        (1) Due to the inherent risk involved and the limited assets in a disaster area dedicated to
delegation support, members should expect certain restrictions on travel (e.g., group size and
composition, frequency and locations of visits). The primary mission of forces assigned to
post-disaster recovery efforts is to save lives and property. CODEL support will not interfere
with these missions.

       (2) OASD(LA) will coordinate with U.S. Northern Command, NGB, and other
appropriate agencies to prescribe congressional travel restrictions to disaster areas. Once
developed, OASD(LA) will disseminate these restrictions (e.g., travel requirements to Louisiana
for Hurricane Katrina) for the Military Departments and the members and employees of
Congress.




                                                 14
                                                                                   ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

    c. Other Special Circumstances. In certain cases, field examinations of appropriation
estimates under the authorities of Reference (c) must be restricted due to military, security, or
operational concerns.

        (1) Travel to locations with ongoing or imminent military operations, travel to nations
determined by the Department of State to be unsuitable, and travel to certain sensitive military
sites abroad may require specific aircraft, security clearance, or travel group requirements.

       (2) OASD(LA) will serve as the liaison between the appropriate commanders and/or
agencies for prescribing congressional travel restrictions under these conditions. Once
developed, OASD(LA) will issue the standards (e.g., travel to the Republic of Georgia during
2008 conflict, travel to U.S. detention facilities abroad) for the Military Departments and the
members and employees of Congress.




                                                 15
                                                                                   ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010

                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AFB            Air Force Base
ASD(LA)        Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs

CODEL          congressional delegation
CONUS          continental United States

DoDD           Department of Defense Directive
DOS            Department of State
DV             distinguished visitor

EASA           Executive Airlift Scheduling Authority
ESGR           Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve

GOVDEL         governor delegation

NGB            National Guard Bureau
NGB-PA         National Guard Bureau, Public Affairs

OASD(LA)       Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs
OCONUS         outside the continental United States

SAM      special air missions
STAFFDEL staff delegation

U.S.C.         United States Code
USG            United States Government

VIP            very important person


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

bosslift. A program of the ESGR and its committees to provide employers of Reserve
Component personnel a better understanding of what their Reservists do when they are away
from their civilian occupation for duty with their military units.

CODEL. One or more sitting members of Congress traveling or planning to travel to sites,
locations, or events for official business.

                                                16
                                                                                      GLOSSARY
                                                                DoDD 4515.12, January 15, 2010



EASA. Scheduling of DV airlift among the headquarters of the Department of the Air Force
(SAM); the Department of the Navy, Office of the Secretary of the Navy; and the Department of
the Army, Office of the Secretary of the Army, to support the transportation of senior
Government officials and CONUS based Combatant Commanders. This activity provides
support to qualifying customers who exceed their normal provider’s capacity by utilizing
available resources of other lift providers. OASD(LA) coordinates aircraft requests, initial
itineraries, and manifests of trips authorized by congressional committee letters and by Secretary
of Defense invitation with EASA. OASD(LA) requests will be filled pursuant to available
resources and standing EASA guidance.

GOVDEL. One or more sitting governors traveling or planning to travel to sites, locations, or
events for official business at the invitation of the Secretary of Defense. Minimum numbers of
governors may be required in order to authorize travel and will be at the discretion of
OASD(LA). GOVDEL travel is limited to OCONUS trips to contingency areas.

military carrier. Any means of transportation; land, sea, or air, operated by or for the DoD
Components, including carriers under charter, contract, or lease, but excluding automotive
transportation.

multi-departmental travel. Travel in which two or more of the Military Departments have a
substantial participation in the activities conducted or installations visited.

nonreimburseable travel. Travel in which the costs are borne by the DoD Component or
Components.

nonsponsored travel. Travel by members and employees of Congress authorized by an official
request by Congress to the Department of Defense.

reimbursable travel. Travel in which the costs are reimbursed to the DoD Component or
Components.

sponsored travel. Travel by members and employees of Congress pursuant to an official
invitation by proper authority in the Department of Defense.

STAFFDEL. One or more employees of the standing committees, leadership offices, or personal
offices of Congress traveling or planning to travel to sites, locations, or events for official
business.




                                                17
                                                                                     GLOSSARY
