                         Department of Defense
                           INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 3025.22
                                                                                  July 26, 2013
                                                          Incorporating Change 1, May 15, 2017

                                                                                         USD(P)

SUBJECT: The Use of the National Guard for Defense Support of Civil Authorities

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides
procedures for the use of the National Guard for Defense Support of Civil Authorities (DSCA) in
accordance with the authority in section 502(f) of Title 32, United States Code (U.S.C.)
(Reference (a)), DoD Directive (DoDD) 5111.1 (Reference (b)), and Deputy Secretary of
Defense Memorandum (Reference (c)); the responsibilities and functions in accordance with
DoDD 5111.13 (Reference (d)); and the guidance in DoDD 3025.18 (Reference (e)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction:

   a. Applies to:

        (1) OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General
of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD
Components”).

        (2) The use of the National Guard for DSCA in response to a request for assistance from
a federal department or agency or qualifying entity in accordance with Reference (e), when
conducted in a duty status pursuant to section 502(f) of Reference (a).

         (a) Except as specified otherwise, reference to DoD use of the National Guard for
DSCA refers to use of the National Guard pursuant to section 502(f) of Reference (a).

           (b) Unless the context indicates otherwise, in this instruction the term “National
Guard” means the Army National Guard, the Air National Guard, the Army National Guard of
the United States, and the Air National Guard of the United States.
                                                                      DoDI 3025.22, July 26, 2013


   b. Does not apply to:

        (1) National Guard activities conducted while on active duty or in federal service in
accordance with sections 12301, 12302, 12303, 12304, 12304b, 12310, 12406, or Chapter 15 of
Title 10, U.S.C. (Reference (f)); sections 112, 509, and 901-908 of Reference (a); or State
immediate response activities using National Guard personnel that are conducted in accordance
with paragraph 4.h. of Reference (e).

        (2) National Guard activities conducted in State active duty status, including State
immediate response activities using National Guard personnel, activities that are determined to
be the responsibilities of the individual States, or activities conducted through the execution of
mutual aid and assistance agreements between the States or local civil authorities.

       (3) The Chief of the National Guard Bureau (CNGB) responsibility to ensure that units
and members of the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard are trained by the States
in accordance with approved policies and programs of the Secretaries of the Army and the Air
Force pursuant to DoDD 5105.77 (Reference (g)).

        (4) National Guard training activities that are conducted in a duty status pursuant to
section 502(a) or 502(f) of Reference (a).

       (5) Innovative readiness training conducted in accordance with DoDD 1100.20
(Reference (h)).

        (6) Military community relations programs and activities administered by the Assistant
to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs in accordance with DoDD 5410.18 (Reference (i)).

       (7) The use of the District of Columbia National Guard for DSCA, which will be
handled in accordance with Executive Order 11485 (Reference (j)) and the Secretary of Defense
Memorandum (Reference (k)).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. In accordance with Reference (a), the Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence of the
affected Governors, is the sole authority to authorize DoD funding of the National Guard for
DoD operations or missions, including DSCA. In coordination with the CJCS, other appropriate
DoD Component heads, and the CNGB, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland
Defense and Global Security (ASD(HD&GS)), as the principal civilian advisor for DSCA,
makes recommendations to the Secretary of Defense for the use of National Guard forces in a
duty status in accordance with section 502(f) of Reference (a) for DSCA.

    b. In accordance with Reference (e), DSCA is initiated by a request for DoD assistance from
civil authorities or qualifying entities, or is authorized by the President or Secretary of Defense.
Any request for assistance that is the responsibility of another federal department or agency will
be redirected to the appropriate department or agency.



Change 1, 05/15/2017                             2
                                                                      DoDI 3025.22, July 26, 2013


    c. In accordance with Reference (e), section 377 of Reference (f), section 1535 of Title 31,
U.S.C. (Reference (l)), and section 5121 et. seq. of Title 42, U.S.C. (also known as “the Robert
T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act”) (Reference (m)), requests for DSCA
include a commitment to reimburse the DoD.

    d. The use of the National Guard to support a federal department or agency or qualifying
entity request for assistance will only be conducted in a duty status pursuant to Reference (f) or
section 502(f) of Reference (a), unless otherwise authorized by the Secretary of Defense.

       (1) The National Guard will be considered for DSCA in accordance with the Global
Force Management (GFM) process.

       (2) The recommendation to approve funding for the National Guard in a duty status
pursuant to section 502(f) of Reference (a) will be made to the Secretary of Defense after:

          (a) The National Guard has been selected as the recommended sourcing solution to
perform a DSCA mission.

           (b) It has been determined that the National Guard in a duty status in accordance with
section 502(f) of Reference (a) is more appropriate than in a duty status in accordance with
Reference (f).

   e. Approval of the use of the National Guard in a duty status pursuant to section 502(f) of
Reference (a) for DSCA requires:

        (1) Receipt of a reimbursable request from a federal department or agency or qualifying
entity for DoD assistance in accordance with the policy established in Reference (e).

     (2) Selection of the National Guard as the sourcing solution to a Combatant
Commander’s request for forces.

       (3) Concurrence from the applicable Governor(s).

        (4) Determination by the Secretary of Defense to approve the use of the National Guard
in a duty status pursuant to section 502(f) of Reference (a) for DSCA to respond to the approved
request.

   f. The use of the National Guard for DSCA will not be approved to:

        (1) Perform DSCA operations or missions at the direct request to DoD of a State or local
civil authority, or to perform activities that the Secretary of Defense determines to be a State’s
responsibility, including activities performed under a mutual aid and assistance agreement.

       (2) Perform activities that are the responsibilities of another federal department or
agency, unless the Secretary of Defense has approved a reimbursable request for DoD assistance
from that federal department or agency.



Change 1, 05/15/2017                             3
                                                                     DoDI 3025.22, July 26, 2013



        (3) Resolve issues regarding matters under State jurisdiction (e.g., concerns about State
active duty pay and allowances, interstate licensure, and liability protections).

    g. Support may be provided on a non-reimbursable basis only if required by law or if both
authorized by law and approved by the Secretary of Defense.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective July 26, 2013.




                                                 James N. Miller
                                                 Under Secretary of Defense for Policy

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 05/15/2017                            4
                                                                DoDI 3025.22, July 26, 2013


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a) Title 32, United States Code
(b) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),”
    December 8, 1999
(c) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,”
    November 30, 2006
(d) DoD Directive 5111.13, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and
    Americas’ Security Affairs (ASD(HD&ASA)),” January 16, 2009
(e) DoD Directive 3025.18, “Defense Support of Civil Authorities,” December 29, 2010, as
    amended
(f) Title 10, United States Code
(g) DoD Directive 5105.77, “National Guard Bureau,” October 30, 2015
(h) DoD Directive 1100.20, “Support and Services for Eligible Organizations and Activities
    Outside the Department of Defense,” April 12, 2004
(i) DoD Directive 5410.18, “Public Affairs Community Relations Policy,”
    November 20, 2001, as amended
(j) Executive Order 11485, “Supervision and Control of the National Guard of the District of
    Columbia,” October 1, 1969
(k) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Supervision and Control of the National Guard of the
    District of Columbia,” October 10, 1969
(l) Title 31, United States Code
(m) Title 42, United States Code
(n) DoD Directive 5105.83, “National Guard Joint Force Headquarters – State (NG JFHQs-
    State),” January 5, 2011, as amended




Change 1, 05/15/2017                         5                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DoDI 3025.22, July 26, 2013


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASD(HD&GS). Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of
Defense (Policy) (USD(P)), the ASD(HD&GS):

    a. Serves as the principal civilian advisor to the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P) on the
use of the National Guard for DSCA.

   b. Advises and makes recommendations to the Secretary of Defense on the use of the
National Guard for DSCA in coordination with the CJCS, other appropriate DoD Component
heads, and the CNGB.

    c. Upon notification from the CJCS of the recommended sourcing solution of National
Guard forces to fulfill a DSCA request, reviews the request, and, if necessary, makes a
recommendation to the Secretary of Defense to approve the use of the National Guard in
accordance with section 502(f) of Reference (a).

    d. Develops and coordinates policy guidance, and oversees the implementation of policy for
the use of the National Guard in a duty status in accordance with section 502(f) of Reference (a)
for DSCA.

    e. Reviews requests for the use of the National Guard for DSCA in accordance with
established policy.

    f. Advises the CJCS, the Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the Air Force, the CNGB,
and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs (ASD(M&RA)) of
requests for the use of the National Guard for DSCA and requests their assessment to include the
effect of such requests on readiness.


2. ASD(M&RA). Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness, the ASD(M&RA) provides recommendations, guidance, and
support on the use of the National Guard in a duty status pursuant to section 502(f) of Reference
(a) for DSCA to the ASD(HD&GS).


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO)). The USD(C)/CFO:

    a. Establishes policies and procedures to ensure timely reimbursement to the DoD for the use
of the National Guard in a duty status pursuant to section 502(f) of Reference (a) for DSCA.




Change 1, 05/15/2017                            6                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 3025.22, July 26, 2013


    b. Advises the Secretary of Defense, USD(P), and ASD(HD&GS) on the issues and fiscal
policy regarding the use of the National Guard for DSCA.


4. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (GC DoD). The GC DoD
provides legal counsel to the Secretary of Defense and the ASD(HD&GS) on the use of the
National Guard for DSCA.


5. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY AND SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. The Secretary
of the Army and Secretary of the Air Force:

    a. When in receipt of an approved request for DSCA, assist the CJCS to identify when the
use of National Guard forces should be the proposed sourcing solution.

  b. Advise the CJCS on requests and recommendations for the use of the National Guard for
DSCA, including any effect on the readiness of the National Guard.

   c. Seek and consider input from the CNGB on matters of policy with respect to the use of the
National Guard for DSCA.

    d. Ensure the necessary policies and procedures are in place to execute the use of the
National Guard in a duty status pursuant to section 502(f) of Reference (a) for DSCA as directed
by the Secretary of Defense with the concurrence of the Governors of the affected States.


6. CJCS. The CJCS:

    a. When in receipt of an approved request for DSCA, considers the use of National Guard
forces in accordance with the GFM process.

   b. When National Guard forces have been identified as a sourcing solution, notifies the
USD(P) in advance of submitting a recommendation or order for approval by the Secretary of
Defense.

   c. Advises the Secretary of Defense and the ASD(HD&GS) on the effects of the use of the
National Guard for DSCA on national security and military readiness.

   d. Reviews and assesses requests and recommendations pertaining to the use of the National
Guard for DSCA. Advises the Secretary of Defense and the ASD(HD&GS) on:

        (1) Potential effects on the operational deployment and employment of forces assigned
or allocated to the Combatant Commands.

       (2) The effect on DoD’s readiness to perform its other primary missions.




Change 1, 05/15/2017                           7                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 3025.22, July 26, 2013


        (3) The potential effect of the use of the National Guard for DSCA on other federal
military operations.

    e. Ensures the necessary policies and procedures are in place to execute the use of the
National Guard in a duty status pursuant to section 502(f) of Reference (a) for DSCA as directed
by the Secretary of Defense with the concurrence of the Governors of the affected States.


7. COMBATANT COMMANDERS WITH DSCA RESPONSIBILITIES. Combatant
Commanders with DSCA responsibilities:

    a. Coordinate with the CNGB and with the appropriate Combatant Commanders to ensure
the approved use of the National Guard for DSCA does not conflict with ongoing or planned
federal missions.

    b. Advise the Secretary of Defense regarding the potential impact of the requested or
recommended use of the National Guard for DSCA on military operations ongoing within the
Combatant Commander’s respective area of responsibility through the CJCS.

   c. Coordinate as necessary, including with representatives of the Primary Agency or
Agencies, the State(s), and the NGB, to ensure that the use of the National Guard for DSCA
supports the overall DoD DSCA response.


8. CNGB. In accordance with Reference (g), the CNGB:

   a. Serves as a principal advisor to the Secretary of Defense, through the CJCS, on matters
involving non-federalized National Guard forces.

    b. Advises the CJCS and the Secretaries and Chiefs of Staff of the Army and the Air Force
on requests and recommendations for the use of the National Guard for DSCA that potentially
affect the readiness of the National Guard to accomplish its State and federal missions.

   c. Serves as an advisor to the Commanders, U.S. Northern Command (USNORTHCOM)
and U.S. Pacific Command (USPACOM), on National Guard matters pertaining to their DSCA
missions. Supports planning and coordination for such activities as requested by the CJCS or the
Commanders of USNORTHCOM and USPACOM.

   d. Assists and coordinates with the applicable State Adjutants General in assessing the
necessity and appropriateness of the recommended use of the National Guard for DSCA.

    e. Assists the Secretary of Defense, through the CJCS and the ASD(HD&GS), in assessing
the appropriateness of the recommended use of the National Guard for DSCA.

    f. Advises and assists the Secretaries of the Army and the Air Force to identify a sourcing
solution in response to a request.



Change 1, 05/15/2017                            8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 3025.22, July 26, 2013


   g. After approval of the use of the National Guard for DSCA, assists the Secretary of
Defense in facilitating and coordinating with requesting federal agencies, the State Adjutants
General, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the appropriate Combatant Commander, and the National
Guard Joint Force Headquarters - State in accordance with DoDD 5105.83 (Reference (n)).

     h. Ensures that National Guard expenditures are appropriately identified and reimbursement
is requested for the use of the National Guard for DSCA in accordance with Reference (e) in
coordination with the USD(C)/CFO and Military Department comptrollers.




Change 1, 05/15/2017                            9                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3025.22, July 26, 2013


                                         GLOSSARY

                      PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 ASD(HD&GS)              Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
                         Security
 ASD(M&RA)               Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs

 CJCS                    Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
 CNGB                    Chief of the National Guard Bureau

 DSCA                    Defense Support of Civil Authorities
 DoDD                    DoD Directive

 GC DoD                  General Counsel of the Department of Defense
 GFM                     Global Force Management

 U.S.C.                  United States Code
 USD(C)/CFO              Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                         Department of Defense
 USD(P)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
 USNORTHCOM              United States Northern Command
 USPACOM                 United States Pacific Command


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS


Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.
request for assistance. A request based on mission requirements and expressed in terms of
desired outcome, formally asking the DoD to provide assistance to a local, State, tribal, or other
federal agency. This term is also commonly called RFA.

State Adjutants General. The Adjutants General of the several States, the Territory of the U.S.
Virgin Islands, the Territory of Guam, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the
Commanding General of the District of Columbia.




Change 1, 05/15/2017                             10                            GLOSSARY
