                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 1438.06
                                                                                January 16, 2014
                                                   Incorporating Change 1, Effective May 4, 2020

                                                                                         USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      DoD Workplace Violence Prevention and Response Policy

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction establishes DoD policy and assigns responsibilities for
workplace violence prevention and response policy regarding DoD civilian personnel in
accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5124.02 (Reference (a)) and Secretary of
Defense Memorandum (Reference (b)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in
this instruction as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. DoD Components work with employees to maintain a work environment free from
violence, threats of violence, harassment, intimidation, and other disruptive behavior. All
employees are responsible for promoting a safe work environment.

    b. Violence, threats, harassment, intimidation, and other disruptive behavior will not be
tolerated in the workplace; all reports of incidents will be taken seriously and will be dealt with
appropriately.

   c. Those who engage in such behavior may be:

       (1) Immediately removed from the premises.

       (2) Denied re-entry pending completion of an appropriate investigation.

       (3) Subject to removal from federal service, criminal prosecution, or both.
                                                             DoDI 1438.06, January 16, 2014



    d. DoD employees will comply with the workplace violence prevention and response
policies of their organizations.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance updates references and removes
expiration language in accordance with current Chief Management Officer of the Department of
Defense direction.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective January 16, 2014.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 1, 05/04/2020                          2
                                                                          DoDI 1438.06, January 16, 2014


                                              ENCLOSURE 1

                                               REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b)   Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Final Recommendations of the Ft. Hood Follow-on
      Review,” August 18, 2010 1
(c)   Interagency Security Committee, “Violence in the Federal Workplace: A Guide for
      Prevention and Response,” April 20132
(d)   Section 7103, Title 5, United States Code




1
  Memorandum can be found on the DoD website (Defense.gov)
http://www.defense.gov/news/d20100820FortHoodFollowon.pdf.
2
  Guide can be found on the DHS website at http://www.dhs.gov/publication/interagency-security-committee-
violence-federal-workplace-guide-april-2013.


Change 1, 05/04/2020                                   3                            ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 1438.06, January 16, 2014


                                       ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) oversees DoD-wide policies and procedures governing the
establishment and administration of workplace violence prevention and response programs
consistent with Interagency Security Committee “Violence in the Federal Workplace: A Guide for
Prevention and Response” (Reference (c)).


2. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR CIVILIAN PERSONNEL
POLICY (DASD(CPP)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Readiness and Force Management, the DASD(CPP):

    a. Serves as the DoD lead for policy development and ensures implementation of workplace
violence prevention and response programs, including education and training, for civilian
employees in accordance with Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

   b. Evaluates the implementation and effectiveness of DoD Component workplace violence
prevention and response programs, including education and training.


3. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

   a. Develop and implement a workplace violence prevention and response program, including
education and training, consistent with Reference (c) and Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

   b. Establish a properly trained threat assessment team to meet Component needs consistent
with Enclosure 3 of this instruction.




Change 1, 05/04/2020                           4                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1438.06, January 16, 2014


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

    a. These procedures provide basic parameters for establishing and promoting workplace
violence prevention programs within DoD and properly investigating and addressing events
consistent with References (b), (c), and this instruction.

   b. All supervisors must immediately report threats of workplace violence to their
management and appropriate military or civilian authorities as determined by local threat
reporting protocol. Appropriate authorities may include security or safety organizations,
employee assistance programs (EAPs), or others as determined locally.

    c. Information regarding an incident or threat of workplace violence, including but not
limited to names of involved parties, witnesses, reports and investigations of allegations, and
findings of workplace violence, will be treated in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations. Statements and reports may be used as evidence in administrative, civil, and
criminal proceedings.


2. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT. DoD Components will:

    a. Establish a planning group to evaluate their current ability to handle workplace violence
incidents and recommend ways to strengthen their response capability.

      (1) All planning group members will be full-time or permanent part-time officers or
employees of the Federal government.

      (2) Members of the planning group should include representatives from management,
employee relations, EAP, legal counsel, law enforcement, and security.

       (3) Depending on the size and structure of the DoD Component, membership may also
include representatives from safety, health unit, medical department, equal employment
opportunity, public affairs, and other appropriate offices and organizations.

    b. Consistent with Reference (c), establish and properly train a threat assessment team that
includes, at a minimum, representatives from legal counsel, employee relations, law
enforcement, security, and any other program representative deemed appropriate by the DoD
Component. Minimal assessment team training should include identifying threats, assessing the
risks associated with a specific threat, and case management.




Change 1, 05/04/2020                             5                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1438.06, January 16, 2014


    c. Ensure that annual training is provided for supervisors and employees to foster workplace
violence prevention and public safety awareness. At a minimum, this training provides
instruction to:

       (1) Refrain from making threats or engaging in workplace violence.

       (2) Promptly report all acts or threats of violence to their immediate supervisor and
appropriate military or civilian authorities.

        (3) Report all incidents of any person on a DoD facility who is the subject of, witness to,
or victim of threatening behavior or a violent act, to their immediate supervisor and appropriate
military or civilian authorities.




Change 1, 05/04/2020                             6                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1438.06, January 16, 2014


                                            GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


DASD(CPP)              Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Civilian Personnel Policy

EAP                    employee assistance program

USD(P&R)               Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.

law enforcement. Any of a number of agencies (outside the Department of Defense) chartered
and empowered to enforce U.S. laws in the following jurisdictions: the United States, a State (or
political subdivision) of the United States, a territory (or political subdivision) of the United
States, a federally recognized Native American tribe or Alaskan Native Village, or within the
borders of a host nation.

security. A military unit, activity, or installation which takes measures to protect itself against all
acts designed to, or which may, impair its effectiveness.

supervisor. Defined in section 7103 of Title 5, United States Code (Reference (d)).

violent behavior. The intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or actual, against a
person or group that either results in or has a high likelihood of injury, death, or psychological
harm to self or others.

workplace violence. Any act of violent behavior, threats of physical violence, harassment,
intimidation, bullying, verbal or non-verbal threat, or other threatening, disruptive behavior that
occurs at or outside the work site.




Change 1, 05/04/2020                              7                              GLOSSARY
