                             DOD INSTRUCTION 1025.08
          NATIONAL GUARD YOUTH CHALLENGE PROGRAM

Originating Component:       Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness

Effective:                   December 31, 2020
Change 2 Effective:          August 12, 2025

Releasability:               Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division Website
                             at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Reissues and Cancels:        DoD Instruction 1025.08, “National Guard Challenge Program,”
                             March 20, 2002

Approved by:                 Matthew P. Donovan, Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                             Readiness
Change 2 Approved By:        Merlynn Carson, Performing the Duties of the Deputy Under Secretary of
                             Defense for Personnel and Readiness


Purpose: In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5124.02 and pursuant to Section 509 of
Title 32, United States Code (U.S.C.), this issuance:
• Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides direction for executing a National Guard
civilian youth opportunities program.
• Describes the program goals, responsibilities of the implementing officials, and relationships
between OSD, the National Guard Bureau (NGB), and the Governors of the States or territories, or the
Commanding General of the District of Columbia National Guard, for implementing the National Guard
Youth Challenge Program (NGYCP).
                                                                                           DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                                                 Change 2, August 12, 2025

                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
NATIONAL GUARD YOUTH CHALLENGE PROGRAM ......................................................................... 1
  Section 1: General Issuance Information ................................................................................. 3
      1.1. Applicability. .............................................................................................................. 3
      1.2. Policy. ......................................................................................................................... 3
      1.3. Information Collections. ............................................................................................. 3
      1.4. Summary of Change 2. ............................................................................................... 4
  Section 2: Responsibilities ....................................................................................................... 5
      2.1. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs (ASD(M&RA)). 5
      2.2. Chief, NGB (CNGB). ................................................................................................. 6
  Section 3: Program ................................................................................................................... 8
      3.1. National Guard Youth Challenge Model. ................................................................... 8
      3.2. Program Personnel. ..................................................................................................... 9
      3.3. Program Participants. ................................................................................................ 10
      3.4. Program Sites. ........................................................................................................... 14
      3.5. Budget and Funding. ................................................................................................. 15
      3.6. State Plans. ................................................................................................................ 17
      3.7. Cooperative Agreements with the States. ................................................................. 18
      3.8. Program Performance and Reporting........................................................................ 18
      3.9. NCCC........................................................................................................................ 19
  Glossary .................................................................................................................................. 20
      G.1. Acronyms. ................................................................................................................ 20
      G.2. Definitions. ............................................................................................................... 20
  References ............................................................................................................................... 24

FIGURES
Figure 1. Medical Care Cost Breakdown ..................................................................................... 13




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                             2
                                                             DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                   Change 2, August 12, 2025

               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY.

This issuance applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector General of
the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this issuance as the “DoD
Components”).


1.2. POLICY.

It is DoD policy that:

    a. The NGYCP is a Federal DoD program conducted and supported by the National Guard
in participating States, territories, and the District of Columbia.

   b. The NGYCP will improve the education, life skills, and employment potential of youth
who are disengaged from traditional educational settings.

   c. The NGYCP is not a military activity of the National Guard, and programs established in
accordance with this issuance will be conducted so as not to detract from military training or
operational activities of the National Guard or the operations of other military Components.
NGYCP falls under the DoD community service and outreach missions.

   d. The activities for NGYCP programs established in accordance with this issuance will be
considered non-combat activities of the National Guard for purposes of Section 710 of Title 32,
U.S.C.

    e. Any implementing NGYCP guidance promulgated by DoD Components or participating
States, territories, and the District of Columbia must be consistent with this issuance.


1.3. INFORMATION COLLECTIONS.

   a. The Annual Program Evaluation Report, referred to in Paragraph 2.1.j. of this issuance, is
exempt from licensing, in accordance with Volume 1 of DoD Manual 8910.01.

   b. The program execution review, referred to in Paragraph 3.5.d. of this issuance, is exempt
from licensing in accordance with Volume 1, Enclosure 3, Paragraph 1.b.(10) of DoD
Manual 8910.01.

    c. Personally identifiable information collected and used in participant selection will be
compliant with DoD Instruction 5400.11 and DoD Regulation 5400.11-R, including appropriate
Privacy Act systems of records notices, if applicable. NGYCP sites must also comply with
applicable State-level privacy requirements.


SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                           3
                                                            DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                  Change 2, August 12, 2025

1.4. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2.

The changes to this issuance are administrative and update language to comply with Executive
Order 14168.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                        4
                                                             DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                   Change 2, August 12, 2025

                           SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE
AFFAIRS (ASD(M&RA)).

Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness, the ASD(M&RA):

   a. Exercises management, budget and funds management, and policy implementation
oversight of the NGYCP.

   b. Exercises the authority of the Secretary of Defense to conduct the NGYCP in accordance
with Section 509 of Title 32, U.S.C.

   c. Prepares, approves, and submits the program’s annual budget in accordance with
Volume 2A of DoD 7000.14-R.

    d. Provides the NGB with fiscal guidance that is consistent with approved funding levels for
the NGYCP.

   e. Funds and oversees fiscal accountability for the approved programs, in accordance with
Volume 2A of DoD 7000.14-R.

    f. Monitors implementation of, and compliance with, this issuance and ensures information
on the NGYCP is exchanged among relevant offices in the DoD Components and Governors of
each participating State and territory, or, in the case of the District of Columbia, with the
Commanding General of the District of Columbia National Guard.

   g. Issues such supplemental guidance as may be necessary for the operation of the NGYCP.

  h. Issues procedures and evaluation standards regarding the selection and location of new
NGYCP sites of this issuance.

   i. Certifies and approves the establishment of new NGYCP sites, in accordance with
Paragraph 3.4.a.

   j. Submits an annual report to Congress on the design, conduct, and effectiveness of the
NGYCP, as specified in Paragraph 3.9.b., and in accordance with Section 509(k) of Title 32,
U.S.C.

     k. Authorizes an NGYCP database, used at the local level to support program operations and
at the national level to evaluate program performance, effectiveness, and comparative analysis,
as specified in Paragraph 3.8.a.(1). This database will apply the same scientific and evidenced-
based metrics and assessment tools at all locations, for use by the NGYCP, the NGB Youth
Programs Office, and the Office of the ASD(M&RA) to facilitate day-to-day operations,
performance management, and longitudinal studies of program effectiveness.



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       5
                                                              DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                    Change 2, August 12, 2025

  l. Supports execution of professional workshops and professional development events for
NGYCP staff members, in coordination with the NGB.

   m. Establishes and maintains a comprehensive performance-based national-level training
program designed specifically for the needs of the NGYCP staff. The program will be consistent
with NGB training policies, and its execution will be coordinated with the NGB Youth Programs
Office. The frequency and scope of this training program will be based on available funds.

    n. Establishes and monitors performance measures of effectiveness that address each of the
eight core components of the NGYCP model.


2.2. CHIEF, NGB (CNGB).

The CNGB:

   a. Designates and staffs an appropriate organizational element within the NGB to administer
and support the NGYCP.

   b. Enters into cooperative agreements, subject to the ASD(M&RA)’s approval, with the
Governors of the States, territories, or, in the case of the District of Columbia, the Commanding
General of the District of Columbia National Guard, as specified in Paragraph 3.7.

    c. Issues regulations, procedures, and operational evaluation standards subject to the
ASD(M&RA)’s approval, for the five elements of the NGYCP, as specified in Paragraph 3.1.
Establishes and maintains a comprehensive national operational and resource management
inspection program.

    d. Issues regulations and procedures, subject to the ASD(M&RA)’s approval, regarding the
operational requirements of multi-site States, such as staggered start dates and State-wide
recruiting efforts. Guidance will foster policies that promote the creation of a State-wide
program with multiple locations rather than those of peer competitors.

  e. Issues guidance for annual resource management reviews to ensure appropriate use of
NGYCP funds. Irregularities found in these reviews will be reported to the ASD(M&RA).

    f. Ensures the United States Property and Fiscal Officer (USPFO) will receive and account
for all NGYCP funds allocated by the ASD(M&RA). The USPFOs will be responsible to
reimburse States for allowable, allocable, and reasonable costs associated with obligation of
funding.

    g. Ensures that all NGYCP organizations operate in accordance with applicable Federal and
State laws, this issuance, ASD(M&RA) policy and guidance, and NGB grants and cooperative
agreements.

   h. Coordinates with the ASD(M&RA) on matters pertaining to the National Civilian
Community Corps (NCCC) and the Corporation for National and Community Service, as
specified in Paragraph 3.9.


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                         6
                                                               DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                     Change 2, August 12, 2025

   i. Recommends an annual budget estimate for program administration to the ASD(M&RA),
within the schedules of the DoD program and budget review process, as specified in
Paragraph 3.5.c. of this issuance.

    j. Administers an annual program budget review and approval process for the participating
States, territories, and the District of Columbia to ensure compliance with the NGYCP
cooperative agreements and NGYCP policies.

    k. Submits quarterly program execution reviews to the ASD(M&RA) that assess program
performance and budget execution, as specified in Paragraph 3.5.d.

   l. Establishes and approves the State’s share of the cost of the program to ensure compliance
with Section 509(d) of Title 32, U.S.C., and other existing laws, rules, and regulations.

   m. Determines and approves the respective State’s share of non-cash supplies and services.
The CNGB may use indirect cost rates, as established in accordance with Federal regulatory
guidance, such as Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-87 and its accompanying
implementation guide, cost principles for State, local, and Indian Tribal governments.

    n. Recommends agendas for professional development opportunities semi-annually for
directors, such as workshops or other approved meetings. At least one of these meetings will be
held in the District of Columbia each year.

   o. Recommends training policy and requirements for the NGYCP staff consistent with the
needs of the NGYCP and available financial resources.

    p. Permits the use of National Guard equipment and facilities, including U.S. military
property issued to the National Guard, to be used in carrying out the program. This includes
housing facilities, General Services Administration vehicles, military buses, and other military
vehicles, individual clothing and equipment under the control of the State USPFO, as well as use
of the Defense Logistics Agency Disposition Services. NGYCPs should be given priority to
receive excess National Guard organizational and individual clothing and equipment that will be
useful to NGYCPs, and to access surplus equipment through the Defense Logistics Agency
Disposition Services.

    q. Issues no supplemental regulations, guidance, or restrictions that conflict with the
stipulations of this issuance or increase the fiscal requirements of the program, without
coordination or delegation of authority from the ASD(M&RA).




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       7
                                                                DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                      Change 2, August 12, 2025

                                  SECTION 3: PROGRAM

3.1. NATIONAL GUARD YOUTH CHALLENGE MODEL.

The NGYCP provides military-based training, discipline, and structure, job readiness training,
and alternative educational approaches through a military-based training model that is the
foundation on which the NGYCP is built. It closely resembles structured and disciplined
entry-level military training that teaches the participants the life-long non-cognitive skills
necessary to become successful adults. Personal skills such as impulse control, self-discipline
and self-regulation, teamwork, follow-through, persistence, and delayed gratification are taught
in a residential setting. Participants who were unable to be successful in a traditional school
setting learn personal responsibility and accountability for their choices that translates well into
short-term marketable post residential opportunities, and long-term productive citizenship. The
NGYCP is composed of five phases. All NGYCPs are required to execute the Recruitment,
Acclimation, Residential, and Post-Residential phases of the NGYCP. This is identified as the
Basic Challenge Program. The fifth phase, Job Challenge, is optional, depending on program
funding, partnerships with industry and technical schools, and facility availability.

   a. Recruitment Phase.

        (1) The NGYCP achieves the greatest impact on disengaged youth by bringing in those
best suited to benefit from the structured and disciplined residential environment. It is vitally
important to the recruitment and selection strategy to choose those individuals most likely to
complete the program, thereby maximizing the program’s resources and providing the
opportunity to a greater number of applicants. Recruitment and application procedures will, to
the fullest extent possible, attempt to reach and include economically disadvantaged and
educationally disadvantaged groups.

        (2) NGYCP is a voluntary program. It is neither a juvenile justice detention alternative
nor a therapeutic environment for those with serious clinical mental health or substance abuse
issues. NGYCP stands unique in mission and format and offers an alternative unlike any other
youth serving program, and should select participants accordingly. Rigorous screening and
selection criteria are the cornerstone of the recruitment approach for NGYCP.

   b. Acclimation Residential Phase.

   Each participant will take part in an acclimation phase of approximately 2 weeks to orient
them to the rigors of the program’s environment and provide program staff the opportunity to
evaluate each participant’s suitability to enter into the follow-on Residential Challenge phase.

   c. Challenge Residential Phase.

   This phase will last at least 20 weeks. The application of a caring, disciplined environment
and the eight core components develops character, strengthens personal skills, and guides cadets
toward self-governance. The eight core components of this phase are:



SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                                     8
                                                               DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                     Change 2, August 12, 2025

       (1) Academic excellence.

       (2) Job skills.

       (3) Health and hygiene.

       (4) Physical fitness.

       (5) Life coping skills.

       (6) Responsible citizenship.

       (7) Leadership and followership.

       (8) Service to the community.

   d. Post-Residential Phase.

    During the 12-month Post-Residential phase, mentors will assist the program staff and
support the program graduates in sustaining the execution of the cadets’ post-residential action
plans for the future while reintegrating them back into open society.

   e. Job Challenge (Optional).

    As part of the Post-Residential phase, NGYCPs may establish a subsequent 5-month
residential program that offers NGYCP graduates the opportunity to learn job skills to enhance
their employability. Job Challenge Academies will accomplish job skills training through
partnerships with technical schools, community colleges, other credentialing agencies, and
industry. Since trade training pathways differ in the length of the schooling, the length of the
residential program may be adjusted to allow Job Challenge cadets the opportunity to take
employment opportunities at their permanent residences after completing, at a minimum, their
Job Challenge trade certification program and their high school degree or equivalency.


3.2. PROGRAM PERSONNEL.

    a. Personnel of the National Guard of a State in which the NGYCP is conducted may serve
on full-time National Guard duty, as defined in Section 101(d)(5) of Title 10, U.S.C., for the
purpose of providing command, administrative, training, or other supporting services for the
program. Such personnel may be ordered to duty pursuant to Section 502(f) of Title 32, U.S.C.,
for no longer than the period of the program to perform these services. Personnel may support
NGYCP while employed in a State active duty status within their respective National Guard
organizations.

    b. The Governor of a State or territory participating in the NGYCP, or the Commanding
General of the District of Columbia National Guard, as appropriate, may procure by contract the
temporary services of such civilian personnel as may be necessary to augment National Guard
personnel in carrying out the program in that State.


SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                                 9
                                                               DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                     Change 2, August 12, 2025

    c. Civilian employees of the National Guard and contract personnel performing services for
the NGYCP may be required, when appropriate, or to achieve a program objective, to wear a
uniform, including logo polo shirts and protective personnel clothing when applicable, purchased
from NGYCP funds. These uniforms are for the purpose of enhancing visibility of NGYCP staff
members, for safety, and for promoting the community’s awareness of the NGYCP.

   d. The demands of operating an NGYCP require a unique combination of specialized skills.
A comprehensive performance-based national-level training program for NGYCP staff will be
implemented and sustained.

     e. The NGB Youth Programs Office will establish notional manning guidance that will
include the minimum necessary ratio of staffing-to-cadets for various staff elements, including
cadre, counselors, instructors, and post-residential case managers. The manning guidance will
also direct the categories of staffing personnel that are included in each NGYCP site. Although
it is recognized that each NGYCP has requirements for individual tailoring of staffing, the
manning guidance provides the basic framework of staffing that is necessary for effective and
safe program operations and management.

    f. Program personnel (other than volunteers and National Guard members serving in a State
active duty status, including duty under Title 32, U.S.C.) will be civilian employees of the State
or employed under contract with the State.

    g. Specific educational, experiential, and other similar criteria for all paid staff members
may not be less than the criteria that would be required for State employees or contract personnel
in similar positions.

    h. Program staff must meet background screening requirements in accordance with DoD
Instruction 1402.05.

    i. Although prior military service and National Guard and Reserve affiliation are recognized
as valuable experience to execute the military training model of the NGYCP, other experience
backgrounds have also proven to be appropriate for NGYCP staff members. Employment
announcements may not limit job eligibility to only members of the National Guard and Reserve,
or prior military personnel.


3.3. PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS.

   a. Selection.

   Selection of participants for the programs established in accordance with this issuance will be
from applicants who meet the following eligibility standards. The ASD(M&RA) will offer
exemptions to these eligibility standards as necessary.

       (1) All NGYCP participants must be:

            (a) A National of the United States (also known as a “U.S. National,” which includes
a U.S. citizen (e.g., a resident of a U.S. territory such as American Samoa) or an alien admitted


SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                              10
                                                               DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                     Change 2, August 12, 2025

for lawful permanent residence in the United States (also known as an “LPR” or “green card
holder”) as these terms are defined in Section 1101 of Title 8, U.S.C.

            (b) Not under indictment, or ever convicted of a felony (or any crime that would be
considered to be a felony if perpetrated by an adult), and not currently on parole or probation for
other than juvenile status offenses or misdemeanors.

           (c) Willing to be free from the illegal use of drugs or substances, alcohol, and
tobacco products during the program.

           (d) Willing and able to participate in a challenging work and living environment with
the reasonable accommodation of physical or mental limitations.

           (e) Able to communicate sufficiently with program staff to participate safely in the
program.

       (2) For the Basic Challenge Program, participants must be:

           (a) Between 16 and 18 years of age on the first day of the Residential phase.
Applicants who are 15-years old and who will turn 16 during the Residential phase can attend if
approved by the Program Director, but such applicants must be enrolled in a high school credit
recovery track to allow for their eventual return to high school.

           (b) A school dropout from secondary school, in accordance with Paragraph (l)(2) of
Section 509 of Title 32, U.S.C.

       (3) For the Job Challenge Program, participants must be:

          (a) Between 17 and 20 years of age on the first day of the Job Challenge Residential
phase. Applicants to Job Challenge who are 16 years of age and will turn 17 during the Job
Challenge Residential phase may be considered for the program if approved by the Program
Director.

           (b) A successful graduate from an NGYCP. Preference will be given to participants
from the immediately preceding class.

        (4) The States will establish procedures to select participants in the NGYCP according to
these eligibility requirements.

           (a) The States will accept applications from eligible youth. States will conduct
interviews and/or formal in-person orientations to the program with each eligible applicant.

           (b) Application procedures will, to the fullest extent possible, attempt to reach and
include economically disadvantaged and educationally disadvantaged groups.

       (5) The ASD(M&RA) will offer exemptions to these eligibility standards and application
procedures as necessary. Individual exceptions to policy will be coordinated through the State
Military Department and the NGB.


SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                                 11
                                                                 DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                       Change 2, August 12, 2025

   b. Status.

      (1) A person who volunteers to participate in the NGYCP will be considered an
employee of the United States for the purposes of the following provisions of the law:

           (a) Implementation and/or administration of Subchapter I of Chapter 81, Title 5,
U.S.C. (relating to compensation of Federal employees for work injuries).

            (b) Implementation and/or administration of Section 1346(b) and Chapter 171 of
Title 28, U.S.C., and any other provisions of law relating to the liability of the United States for
tortious conduct of employees of the United States.

       (2) A person receiving training under the NGYCP is not considered an employee of the
United States for any purpose other than a purpose established in Paragraph 3.3.c.

   c. Benefits.

    To the extent provided in an agreement as specified in Paragraph 2.2.b., a person selected as
a participant for training in programs established in accordance with this issuance may receive
the following benefits:

       (1) Allowances for travel expenses, personal expenses, and other expenses.

       (2) Quarters.

       (3) Subsistence.

       (4) Transportation.

       (5) Equipment.

       (6) Education services and supplies.

       (7) Clothing.

       (8) Recreational services and supplies.

       (9) Medical care.

            (a) Medical care for participants provided by the NGYCP will be limited to screening
as necessary to ensure the suitability of the participant to meet program requirements. NGYCP
sites are authorized, but not required, to pay for participants’ entrance physicals. Emergency
medical care for an injury determined to be incurred in the line of duty will be covered as
directed in Paragraph 3.3.b.

            (b) Participants are required to be medically screened to determine their medical
suitability before entry into NGYCP; therefore, participants selected will receive a physical
examination in conjunction with their entry into the program. This examination may be


SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                                 12
                                                               DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                     Change 2, August 12, 2025

accomplished through contract and paid for from funds specifically authorized and appropriated
for the program. It may also be accomplished by National Guard medical personnel if available
within the State National Guard structure under authorities as specified in Paragraph 3.2.b., or in
a State active duty status with the State’s Adjutant General’s consent. Such examination will be
sufficiently complete so that a conclusion may be reached as to the participant’s ability to
complete program requirements with reasonable accommodation for physical and other
disabilities. If permitted under State law and regulation, the Program Director may include
testing for pregnancy.

           (c) The cost of other routine medical care and emergency illness care will remain the
responsibility of the participants’ parents or guardians, as specified in Figure 1.

                           Figure 1. Medical Care Cost Breakdown




            (d) Under exigent circumstances, programs are authorized to pay up-front costs
related to non-emergency medical requirements, such as co-pays for medications and doctors’
visits, and vision and dental requirements. Programs will make every reasonable attempt to seek
reimbursement from the families or appropriate insurers for these costs.

          (e) Exceptions to the policies in Paragraph 3.3.c.(9) may be granted by the NGB
Youth Programs Office.

       (10) Other services, as approved by the ASD(M&RA).

        (11) Stipends, as appropriate. Stipends may be paid to participants during the Post-
Residential phase to support continued education, vocational training, and/or expenses associated
with securing or maintaining employment. Stipends may be paid out on a periodic basis or at the
end of the Post-Residential phase, in an amount not to exceed $2,500 in total for any one
participant. Procedures for distributing stipends must be in compliance with the applicable
cooperative agreement as specified in Paragraph 2.2.b. and Paragraphs 3.8. through 3.8.b.
Programs will establish clear objectives related to distribution of funds that are in support of


SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                               13
                                                              DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                    Change 2, August 12, 2025

specific career plans developed by the participants during the Residential phase of the
NGYCP, and should not solely use this option for administrative or reporting purposes.

   d. Participants’ Willingness to be Drug, Alcohol, and Tobacco Free.

        (1) Eligibility for NGYCP includes participants’ willingness to be drug, alcohol, and
tobacco free during the Residential phase, despite any previous involvement with these
substances. Participants’ eligibility will be based on demonstrated abstinence from these
substances during the Residential phase. Entrance drug screening is not required, but measures
must be taken by the programs to verify that the participants remain drug, alcohol, and tobacco
free throughout the Residential phase. NGYCP participants will remain free of the use of
tobacco in any form (including e-cigarettes and other alternatives) during the Residential phase
of the program.

        (2) Programs must perform drug testing of cadets who have been outside the physical
control of the program staff (such as after medical absences, family leave, or corps passes).

       (3) Programs may drug test any participant on a random basis or based on suspicion of
use based on probable cause.

        (4) The NGB Youth Programs Office may establish additional drug testing policies
consistent with this issuance.


3.4. PROGRAM SITES.

   a. Establishment of New NGYCP Sites.

        (1) Priority for new programs will be given to States or territories, or geographical
regions, with no NGYCP; then to States or territories, or geographical regions, with the highest
high school dropout rates. In States that are underserved (demonstrated greater demand than can
be satisfied with existing NGYCP capacities), priority will be given to expanding existing
locations, if feasible, before approval is given to add an additional site.

        (2) Programs established in accordance with this issuance will be sited in such a manner
as to contain a population catchment area sufficient to support the dropout participants and
personnel and manpower for staffing. Priority will be given to locations that are near necessary
emergency services, such as fire, medical, and law enforcement.

        (3) The ASD(M&RA) will establish a formal process to review and approve the
establishment of new NGYCP sites. In coordination with the CNGB’s staff, the ASD(M&RA)
Challenge Program Manager will evaluate requests from interested States for demonstrated need,
appropriateness of site location and facilities, and availability of State matching funding.




SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                              14
                                                               DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                     Change 2, August 12, 2025

   b. Facilities.

        (1) Both military and civilian facilities may be used as locations for NGYCP sites, as
approved by the ASD(M&RA). Priority should be given to the use of existing military facilities.
The State can request to utilize non-military facilities as part of the approval process for
establishing a new location. Such utilization of non-military facilities must employ a long-term
lease option to ensure program stability.

        (2) Existing facilities are preferred for use as NGYCP locations. DoD operations and
maintenance funds available for the day-to-day operation of the NGYCP are not authorized for
use in the construction of new dormitories, dining facilities, office space, classrooms, or
recreational facilities. States may construct new buildings or additional square footage to
existing facilities for use by the NGYCP utilizing non-DoD funds.

        (3) States will configure NGYCP sites to provide dedicated accommodations for
billeting, dining, recreation, and classrooms. If shared, accommodations must be assured to have
reliable access for NGYCP activities.

        (4) In the event that an NGYCP has the need to change its location, the ASD(M&RA)
must approve the new site before the move, using the same site suitability approval process as
for a new program.

   c. Security Surveillance.

    Programs will monitor NGYCP facilities by electronic surveillance cameras in all
cadet-utilized areas for the safety of the cadets and for the staff’s protection. Video monitoring
of areas where clothing is changed or privacy is required must be performed only by same-sex
staff members.

   d. Improvements and Modifications.

    Improvements and modifications of facilities will be limited to general upkeep, maintenance,
and limited modernization changes to make facilities safe and habitable for NGYCP participants.
Use of State-matched Federal funding for improvements and/or modifications to facilities will
not exceed $250,000 per building, per year, unless granted an exception by the ASD(M&RA).
Exception requests must be coordinated through the NGB Youth Programs Office.

   e. Tobacco Prohibitions.

  The use of any tobacco products by NGYCP staff members and visitors is prohibited on
NGYCP facilities outside designated tobacco use areas.


3.5. BUDGET AND FUNDING.

   a. Program Funding.




SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                               15
                                                              DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                    Change 2, August 12, 2025

        (1) To carry out the NGYCP in a State, the Secretary of Defense may use funds
appropriated directly to the DoD or non-DoD funds made available or transferred to the
Secretary of Defense by other Federal agencies. The Governor of the State, or in the case of the
District of Columbia, the Commanding General of the District of Columbia National Guard may
supplement funds made available under the program with other non-DoD resources available to
the Governor or Commanding General. The Governor or Commanding General may accept, use,
and dispose of gifts or donations of money, other property, or services for the NGYCP, using
approved accountability procedures, and subject to audit.

            (a) The amount of assistance provided by the Secretary of Defense to a State
program for a fiscal year from funds appropriated to the DoD may not exceed the Federal share
of the costs of operating the State program during that fiscal year, as directed by Federal law.

            (b) Allowable contributions from States are cash, non-cash supplies, and services,
including supplemental resources (e.g., donated gifts and services) from other sources and
indirect costs. Non-cash contributions or in-kind contributions proposed to be part of the State
cost share are discouraged. They are allowable only with review and coordination from the NGB
Youth Programs Office and final approval by the ASD(M&RA).

            (c) Other non-DoD funding sources are not governed by the DoD and non-DoD
cost-share requirement.

        (2) The Office of the ASD(M&RA) will transfer funds made available in the Operation
and Maintenance, Defense-wide appropriations to the CNGB upon approval of the annual budget
request from the NGB Youth Programs Office. Each request will be accompanied by the State
matching certification letter that confirms the State’s contribution to the amount of assistance
provided to operate the program. All funds issued to the NGB will be earmarked for use by a
particular State, or in the case of funds for use by the NGB for its management operations, funds
will be earmarked by management budget allocation category. Funds will be administered in
accordance with Volume 3 of DoD 7000.14-R, and they will be used according to the purposes
for which they are lawfully available. Reasonable funding flexibility will be given to the States
in order to make necessary adjustments in support of the day-to-day operations of the program.

   b. Role of the USPFO.

   It is the responsibility of the USPFO to:

       (1) Account for NGYCP resources.

       (2) Input financial transactions into applicable accounting systems.

       (3) Monitor the cooperative agreements as specified in Paragraph 3.7.

       (4) Ensure proper fiscal and internal controls.

       (5) Certify that Federal reimbursements meet NGYCP cooperative agreement and other
regulatory parameters for the effective and lawful use of NGYCP Federal funds.



SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                             16
                                                               DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                     Change 2, August 12, 2025

   c. Annual Budget Estimate.

       (1) In accordance with Volume 2A of DoD 7000.14-R, the ASD(M&RA) will submit
annually a budget estimate for program administration to the Washington Headquarters Services.

        (2) Any use of Operation and Maintenance, Defense-wide funds by the CNGB for
centralized program management that is not subject to the program’s Federal and/or State
cost-share requirements, will require the advance submission of a detailed budget to the
ASD(M&RA) for approval. Expenses subject to this advance approval requirement include, but
are not limited to, all contracts; training support requirements, such as workshops and
educational materials; special events; travel; and office automation expenses.

   d. Program Execution Review.

   During each fiscal year, the NGB Youth Programs Office will monitor State program budget
execution, contract management, and obligation of funds. The NGB Youth Programs Office will
provide quarterly fund obligation and execution reports to the Office of the ASD(M&RA).
During the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, NGB will submit updated monthly obligation and
execution reports by the 30th day of each month.


3.6. STATE PLANS.

    a. States will submit initial and afterwards annual State NGYCP plans and budget estimates
through the NGB Youth Programs Office, to the ASD(M&RA) for approval and funding. These
State plans will be submitted consistent with their respective State budgeting fiscal year
timeframes. Budgets will be submitted, as soon as they are developed for their Governor’s
request to the State legislature, to ensure sufficient time for review by the NGB Youth Programs
Office and Office of the ASD(M&RA).

   b. State plans will at least include:

       (1) Details on application and selection procedures.

       (2) Targeted number of graduates.

       (3) Staffing and staff training.

       (4) Curriculum.

       (5) Services and facilities expenditures, including facility renovation projections.

       (6) State public and private services to be provided.

       (7) Post-Residential Program.

       (8) Establishment of non-profit organizations.



SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                            17
                                                              DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                    Change 2, August 12, 2025

       (9) A detailed budget.

       (10) Recruiting and marketing plans.

       (11) Program standard operating procedures.

       (12) Hands-off leadership policy.


3.7. COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS WITH THE STATES.

    a. The cooperative agreement established pursuant to Section 509(c) of Title 32, U.S.C.,
will, as appropriate, comply with the requirements of this issuance, as well as requirements
found in Section 6305 of Title 31, U.S.C., DoD Directive 3210.06, and any regulations
prescribed by the CNGB.

    b. The NGB Youth Programs Office will maintain an electronic list of all cooperative
agreements and amendments issued on behalf of the NGYCP. The list will include the date of
the signature of the agreement and any amendments, amount, and date obligation document is
issued. NGB will provide the list for review by the ASD(M&RA) upon request.


3.8. PROGRAM PERFORMANCE AND REPORTING.

   a. Program Performance.

       (1) ASD(M&RA) will:

            (a) Establish performance measures of effectiveness that address each of the eight
core components of the NGYCP, in conjunction with CNGB as specified in Paragraph 2.1.n. of
this issuance.

          (b) Establish and maintain a national information database that tracks NGYCP
performance.

       (2) The NGB Youth Programs Office will:

           (a) Establish metrics for program performance, and remediation plans and penalties
for poor program performance, subject to the ASD(M&RA)’s approval.

           (b) Conduct inspections to ensure compliance with program requirements and
policies. The goal is to conduct inspections at every location at least every 3 years. The
frequency and scope of the inspection program will be based on available funding.

           (c) Provide updates to the ASD(M&RA) on a periodic basis as required.




SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                             18
                                                             DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                   Change 2, August 12, 2025

   b. Report to Congress.

        (1) Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the ASD(M&RA) will submit a
report to Congress on the design, conduct, and effectiveness of the NGYCP during the preceding
fiscal year. The report will include detailed program results and totals both by State and by
program; 3-year trend data; and recommendations for program improvement in each area of
program design, conduct, and effectiveness.

       (2) In preparing the report, the ASD(M&RA) will ensure that the NGB Youth Programs
Office coordinates the prepared report through each State’s Military Department in which the
NGYCP is carried out, and if the program is carried out in the District of Columbia, with the
Military Department of the Commanding General of the District of Columbia National Guard.


3.9. NCCC.

    a. The NGB Youth Programs Office will coordinate with the ASD(M&RA) on matters
pertaining to the NCCC and the Corporation for National and Community Service to ensure:

      (1) The programs established in accordance with this issuance are conducted in such a
manner in relationship to each other that the public benefit of those programs is maximized.

        (2) To the maximum extent appropriate to meet the needs of the program participants,
persons who complete participation in the NGYCP and who are otherwise eligible to apply for
and to participate in the NCCC, will be accepted for participation in the NCCC program.

        (3) The programs established in accordance with this issuance are conducted
simultaneously within a discrete geographical area of the United States only when the population
of eligible participants in that area is sufficient to justify the simultaneous conduct of such
programs.

    b. A person selected for training under a program established in accordance with this
issuance who later becomes a member of the NCCC in accordance with Subtitle E of Title I,
Public Law 101-610, may not receive a temporary stipend while a member of the NCCC in
accordance with Paragraph 3.3.c.(11) of Title I, Public Law 101-610. The person may receive
the temporary stipend after completing service in the NCCC unless the person elects to receive
benefits provided in accordance with Public Law 101-610.




SECTION 3: PROGRAM                                                                               19
                                                               DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                     Change 2, August 12, 2025

                                          GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

 ACRONYM                   MEANING

 ASD(M&RA)                 Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs

 CNGB                      Chief, National Guard Bureau

 NCCC                      National Civilian Community Corps
 NGB                       National Guard Bureau
 NGYCP                     National Guard Youth Challenge Program

 U.S.C.                    United States Code
 USPFO                     United States Property and Fiscal Officer


G.2. DEFINITIONS.

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

 TERM                      DEFINITION

Adjutant General           A National Guard general officer in each State and territory, Puerto
                           Rico, and a Commanding General for the District of Columbia who
                           performs the duties prescribed by the laws of that jurisdiction. In the
                           case of the District of Columbia, the President appoints the
                           Commanding General of the District of Columbia and prescribes his
                           grade and qualifications.

catchment area             The area and population from which a city or individual service
                           attracts visitors or customers.

cooperative                NGYCP agreements that are issued in accordance with the authority
agreements                 of Section 509 of Title 32, U.S.C.; Section 6305 of Title 31, U.S.C.;
                           and DoD Directive 3210.06. The purpose of such an agreement is to
                           provide Federal support to the States for certain youth programs as
                           established in Section 509 of Title 32, U.S.C. The agreement defines
                           the terms and conditions of the support DoD will provide to the
                           States. This includes any agreements entered into by OSD and/or
                           NGB, with the States that are funded by DoD appropriations for the
                           Army National Guard and Air National Guard, for:
                           Construction, minor construction, maintenance, repair, or operation
                           of facilities and operations of the Army National Guard and Air
                           National Guard consistent with implementing this program.


GLOSSARY                                                                                          20
                                                          DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                Change 2, August 12, 2025

TERM                 DEFINITION

                     Other programs authorized and directed by Congress or the DoD to
                     be performed by the States and the NGB.

credit recovery      Educational program whereby cadets may obtain high school credits
                     that meet State educational requirements, to count towards attaining
                     their high school diploma upon their potential return to a traditional
                     high school.

Defense Logistics    Formerly known as the “Defense Reutilization and Marketing
Agency Disposition   Office.” The DoD entity that facilitates the reuse, transfer, donation,
Services             sale, or disposal of excess DoD property.

dropout              A general term that describes a youth who is no longer attending any
                     school and who has not received a secondary school diploma or a
                     certificate from a program of equivalency for such diploma. To meet
                     this specific requirement, it is not necessary for a youth to be legally
                     considered a dropout in their State of residence, but only that the
                     youth is habitually truant and/or is failing to progress academically so
                     that there is a reasonable expectation that they will not be able to earn
                     a secondary school diploma. Active engagement in academic
                     programs directly related to enrollment in NGYCP does not affect an
                     NGYCP cadet’s eligibility.

economically         An individual who is subject to one or more of the following
disadvantaged        circumstances:
                     1. Receives, or is a member of a family that receives, cash welfare
                     and/or public assistance payments under a Federal, State, or local
                     welfare and/or public assistance program.
                     2. Has, or is a member of a family that has, received a total family
                     income for the 12-month (or 6-month, annualized, if 12-month data
                     are not available) period before application to the program which, in
                     relation to family size, was not in excess of the higher of:
                          (a) The poverty level determined according to criteria
                     established by the Department of Health and Human Services; or
                          (b) Seventy percent of the lower living standard income level.
                     3. Receives assistance pursuant to the Supplemental Nutrition
                     Assistance Program in accordance with Chapter 51 of Title 7, U.S.C.
                     4. Is a foster child on behalf of whom State or local government
                     payments are made.
                     5. Is homeless.

educationally        Youths who have limited basic skills or limited English proficiency,
disadvantaged        or who have failed to progress in school on par with their peers.



GLOSSARY                                                                                      21
                                                             DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                   Change 2, August 12, 2025

TERM                     DEFINITION

equipment                Any item purchased for the performance of this Master Youth
                         Cooperative that is not military equipment. Equipment may also
                         include organizational clothing and individual equipment provided by
                         the USPFO from retired or surplus National Guard supplies.

fiscal year              The Federal fiscal year starting on October 1 and ending on
                         September 30 each year.

indirect costs           The rates developed using Office of Management and Budget
                         Circular No. A-87.

in-kind contribution     The value of non-cash contributions (i.e., property or services) that
                         benefit a Federally-assisted project or program, and are contributed
                         by non-Federal third parties, without charge, to a non-Federal entity
                         under a Federal award.

juvenile status          A violation of State statutes that cannot be committed by an adult.
offenses                 Common “status offences” are truancy, runaways, underage drinking,
                         or buying tobacco products underage.

mentor                   An experienced person who assists another (the mentee) in
                         developing specific skills and knowledge that will enhance the
                         less-experienced person’s professional and personal growth.

non-cognitive skills     Any skill that is not related to knowledge acquisition but is more
                         related to interpersonal interactions and individual standards of
                         conduct. Examples include grit, locus-of-control, perseverance,
                         delayed gratification, time preference, and following directions.

operational activities   Actions by the State, through employment by the State, by contract or
                         hire of sufficient personnel, acquisition by contract of supplies or
                         services, or other necessary actions, to perform the services, tasks, or
                         activities within the scope of the cooperative agreement, which are
                         properly charged to an operation and maintenance appropriation.

State                    Any one of the 50 States of the United States of America and
                         includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
                         Rico, and the territories.

State Military           An organization within the State governments, under the leadership
Department               of the Adjutant General.




GLOSSARY                                                                                         22
                                                          DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                                Change 2, August 12, 2025

TERM                   DEFINITION

State’s share of the   The allowable contributions are cash, non-cash supplies, and
cost                   services; to include supplemental resources (donated gifts and
                       services) from other sources and indirect costs.

supplies               Any supplies purchased for the performance of this cooperative
                       agreement that are not military supplies and are purchased through
                       the State contracting procedures and not purchased through the
                       Federal contract procedures.

territory              Defined in Section 101 of Title 32, U.S.C.

USPFO                  The qualified commissioned officer of the Army National Guard or
                       the Air National Guard, as the case may be, designated by the CNGB,
                       to be the USPFO of a State or territory. The USPFO receives and
                       accounts for all funds and property of the United States in the
                       possession of the National Guard for which he is the property and
                       fiscal officer and makes returns and reports concerning those funds
                       and that property, as required by the Secretary of the Military
                       Department concerned in accordance with Chapter 708 of Title 32,
                       U.S.C.




GLOSSARY                                                                                    23
                                                        DoDI 1025.08, December 31, 2020
                                                              Change 2, August 12, 2025

                                    REFERENCES
DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
DoD 7000.14-R, Volume 2A, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation:
   Budget Formulation and Presentation (Chapters 1-3),” current edition
DoD 7000.14-R, Volume 3, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation: Budget
   Execution–Availability and Use of Budgetary Resources,” current edition
DoD Directive 3210.06, “Defense Grant and Agreement Regulatory System (DGARS),”
   February 6, 2014, as amended
DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
   (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
DoD Instruction 1402.05, “Background Checks on Individuals in DoD Child Care Services
   Program,” September 11, 2015, as amended
DoD Instruction 5400.11, “DoD Privacy and Civil Liberties Programs,” January 29, 2019,
   as amended
DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for DoD
   Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
Executive Order 14168, “Defending Women from Gender Ideology Extremism and Restoring
   Biological Truth to the Federal Government,” January 20, 2025
Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-87, “Cost Principles for State, Local, and
   Indian Tribal Governments,” current edition
Public Law 101-610, “National and Community Service Act of 1990,”
   November 16, 1990
United States Code, Title 5
United States Code, Title 7, Chapter 51
United States Code, Title 8, Section 1101
United States Code, Title 10, Section 101(d)(5)
United States Code, Title 28
United States Code, Title 31, Section 6305
United States Code, Title 32




REFERENCES                                                                            24
