                               Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 5100.87
                                                                             February 19, 2008
                                                           Incorporating Change 1, April 6, 2017

                                                                                           DCMO

SUBJECT:     Department of Defense Human Resources Activity (DoDHRA)

References: (a) Sections 113, 191-192 of title 10, United States Code
            (b) DoD Directive 5100.87, “Department of Defense Human Resources Activity
                (DoDHRA),” June 29, 1998 (hereby canceled)
            (c) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
            (d) DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,”
                May 19, 2014
            (e) Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12, “Policy for a Common
                Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors,”
                August 27, 2004
            (f) DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” April 25, 2013


1. PURPOSE

Under the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by Reference (a), this Directive:

     1.1. Reissues Reference (b) to update the mission, organization and management,
responsibilities and functions, relationships, and authorities of the DoDHRA, under the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), in accordance with Reference
(c).

   1.2. Establishes the Defense Language Office (DLO), the Sexual Assault Prevention and
Response Office (SAPRO), and the Defense Travel Management Office (DTMO) within the
DoDHRA.
                                                               DoDD 5100.87, February 19, 2008



2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military
Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense
(hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. MISSION

DoDHRA enhances the operational effectiveness and efficiency of diverse programs supporting
the Department of Defense. DoDHRA combines centralized management of operations and
administrative oversight with decentralized program guidance. It supports policy development,
develops products and services that promote and sustain a high performing workforce, performs
research and analysis, supports readiness and departmental reengineering efforts, manages
personnel data repositories, prepares future civilian leaders through developmental programs,
supports recruiting and retention, and delivers both benefits and critical services to warfighters
and their families. DoDHRA administers sexual assault prevention policies and programs,
assists in establishing and administering language capabilities policies, and oversees central
management of commercial travel.


4. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

DoDHRA is established as a DoD Field Activity under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R). It shall consist of a Director, a Deputy Director, and an Executive Director, with
subordinate organizational elements established by the Director, DoDHRA, within resources
assigned by the Secretary of Defense.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS

The Director, DoDHRA, shall:

    5.1. Organize, direct, and manage the DoDHRA and all assigned resources, including but
not limited to the following components:

       5.1.1. Civilian Personnel Management Service

       5.1.2. Defense Manpower Data Center

       5.1.3. Personnel and Readiness Information Management

       5.1.4. Office of the Actuary



Change 1, 04/06/2017                             2
                                                               DoDD 5100.87, February 19, 2008



       5.1.5. National Committee for Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve

       5.1.6. Defense Advisory Committee on Women in the Services

       5.1.7. Federal Voting Assistance Program

       5.1.8. Defense Personnel Security Research Center

       5.1.9. SAPRO

       5.1.10. DLO

       5.1.11. DTMO

       5.1.12. Per Diem, Travel, and Transportation Allowance Committee

    5.2. Maintain central repository of the DoD Human Resource Information, both current and
historic. Collect, provide, and utilize this information for the benefit of decision makers of the
Department of Defense and other Government agencies. Develop and enhance identity
protection and physical and logical access through the Personnel Identity Protection Program.
Provide a central source of identification and authentication of people in the Department of
Defense for identity protection, security, entitlements, and benefits verification.

    5.3. Provide program and policy support and associated information management and
administrative services to the DoD Components on civilian human resource matters, including,
but not limited to the following:

       5.3.1 Developing and administering delegated special salary rate program, pay
schedules, and special occupational and organizational pay schedules.

        5.3.2. Implementing, maintaining, and ensuring the efficient and effective operation of
the DoD Priority Placement Program, workforce restructuring, and other DoD downsizing and
transition assistance programs for civilian employees.

      5.3.3. Developing and providing advice and oversight on all departmental labor and
employee relations policy and related guidance.

    5.4. Support functional policy analyses, workshops, and change management activities;
define and/or document functional requirements; provide for business process reengineering,
continuous process improvement; and develop, integrate, and provide functional oversight for
the Human Resources Management (HRM) Enterprise Architecture and HRM information
management initiatives. Initiate, coordinate, and execute project and/or program areas such as
information management analysis, information assurance, critical infrastructure protection,
information technology, functional data administration, and data standardization.




Change 1, 04/06/2017                             3
                                                              DoDD 5100.87, February 19, 2008


    5.5. Provide DoD-wide guidance on civilian personnel policy and professional development
programs (except with regard to Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel System, where guidance
is developed by the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence in conjunction with the
USD(P&R)). Provide support to the DoD Components in the administration of human resources
policies and programs.

    5.6. Act as the source for collecting and archiving manpower-related databases, as well as
providing management information based on research and analysis of human resources and other
related federal functional area databases for the Department of Defense.

   5.7. Administer the sexual assault prevention and response policies and programs for the
Department of Defense. These are designed to eliminate sexual assault within the Department of
Defense by providing a culture of prevention, education and training, response capability, victim
support, reporting procedures, and accountability to enhance the safety and well-being of all its
members.

    5.8. Assist in the establishment and administration of policy regarding the development,
maintenance, and utilization of language capabilities; monitor trends in the promotion, accession,
and retention of individuals with critical skills; and explore innovative concepts to expand
language capabilities.

   5.9. Serve as the single focal point for commercial travel within the Department of Defense.
Assist in establishing strategic direction and in establishing and administering travel policy;
centrally manage all commercial travel programs.

     5.10. Provide management information, research, and analysis of manpower, personnel,
training, and financial databases for use by DoD decision makers. Conduct surveys to assess the
attitudes and opinions of Military Service members (active duty and reserve) and DoD civilians.
Provide a DoD program for joint marketing communications and market research and studies in
compliance with DoD Instruction 8910.01 (Reference (d)).

    5.11. Provide policy support for DoD identification cards that are distributed to members of
the Military, DoD civilians, contractors, and other eligible personnel. This includes oversight
responsibilities for the Defense Eligibility Enrollment Reporting System, the Common Access
Card, and compliance with the Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12 (Reference (e)).

    5.12. Design and manage DoDHRA programs and activities to improve standards of
performance, economy, and efficiency. Demonstrate DoDHRA’s attention to the requirements
of its organizational customers, both internal and external to the Department of Defense.

  5.13. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Secretary of Defense or the
USD(P&R).




Change 1, 04/06/2017                            4
                                                               DoDD 5100.87, February 19, 2008


6. RELATIONSHIPS

    6.1. In the performance of assigned responsibilities and functions, the Director, DoDHRA,
shall:

       6.1.1. Coordinate and exchange information with the OSD Principal Staff Assistants
(PSAs) and the Heads of the other DoD Components having collateral or related responsibilities
and functions.

        6.1.2. Use established systems, facilities, and services in the Department of Defense and
other Government agencies, when possible, to avoid duplication and achieve maximum
efficiency and economy of operations.

    6.2. The OSD PSAs and the Heads of the other DoD Components shall provide assistance
and coordinate with the Director, DoDHRA, on all matters under their purview related to the
authorities, responsibilities, and functions assigned in this Directive.


7. AUTHORITIES

The Director, DoDHRA, is hereby delegated authority to:

    7.1. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry
out assigned responsibilities and functions, including the transmission of requests for advice and
assistance. Communications to the Military Departments shall be transmitted through the
Secretaries of the Military Departments, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law or
directed by the Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the
Commanders of the Combatant Commands normally shall be transmitted through the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

    7.2. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the Legislative
Branch, members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments, as appropriate, to
carry out assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with representatives of the
Legislative Branch shall be coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative
Affairs or the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of
Defense, as appropriate, and be consistent with the DoD Legislative Program.

    7.3. Obtain reports and information consistent with Reference (d) as necessary to carry out
assigned responsibilities and functions.

   7.4. Exercise the operational and administrative authorities contained in Enclosure 1.


8. ADMINISTRATION

   8.1. The USD(P&R) shall appoint the Director, DoDHRA.



Change 1, 04/06/2017                            5
                                                          DoDD 5100.87, February 19, 2008



    8.2. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall assign military personnel to the
DoDHRA in accordance with approved authorizations and established procedures for assignment
to joint duty.

   8.3. Administrative support for the DoDHRA shall be provided by appropriate DoD
Components through interservice support agreements in accordance with DoD Instruction
4000.19 (Reference (f)).


9. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. Available on the DoD Issuances Website at
http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


10. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


11.   EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective February 19, 2008.




Enclosure - 1
 E1. Delegations of Authority




Change 1, 04/06/2017                             6
                                                                DoDD 5100.87, February 19, 2008


                                       E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                               DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY


Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(P&R), and in accordance with DoD policies and issuances, the
Director, DoDHRA, or in the absence of the Director, the person acting for the Director, is
hereby delegated authority as required in the administration and operation of the DoDHRA to:

   E1.1. Perform in accordance with Executive Order (EO) 10450, “Security Requirements for
Government Employment,” April 27, 1953; E.O. 12968, “Access to Classified Information,”
August 2, 1995; and E.O. 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981; and
DoD Directive 5200.2, as appropriate, to:

       E1.1.1. Designate any position in the DoDHRA as a “sensitive” position.

        E1.1.2. Authorize, in case of emergency, the appointment of a person to a sensitive
position in the DoDHRA for a limited time even though a full field investigation or other
appropriate investigation, including the National Agency Check, has not been completed.

        E1.1.3. Initiate personnel security investigations and, if necessary, in the interest of
national security, suspend security access to classified information for personnel assigned to,
detailed to, or employed by DoDHRA. Any action under this paragraph shall be taken in
accordance with procedures prescribed in DoD 5200.2-R.

       E1.1.4. Authorize the suspension, but not termination of the services, of a DoDHRA
employee in the interest of national security. Any action under this paragraph shall be taken in
accordance with procedures prescribed in DoD 5200.2-R.

   E1.2. Authorize and approve:

     E1.2.1. Temporary duty travel for military personnel assigned or detailed to the
DoDHRA in accordance with Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1, “Uniformed Service
Members,” current edition.

       E1.2.2. Travel for DoDHRA civilian employees in accordance with Joint Travel
Regulations (JTR), Volume 2, “DoD Civilian Personnel,” current edition.

        E1.2.3. Invitational travel to non-DoD personnel whose consultative, advisory, or other
highly specialized technical services are required in a capacity that is directly related to, or in
connection with, DoDHRA activities, in accordance with JTR, Volume 2.

       E1.2.4. Overtime work for DoDHRA civilian employees in accordance with subchapter
V, chapter 55 of title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), and applicable Office of Personnel
Management regulations.



Change 1, 04/06/2017                             7                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 5100.87, February 19, 2008



    E1.3. Approve the expenditure of funds available for travel by assigned or detailed
DoDHRA military personnel for expenses incident to attending meetings of technical, scientific,
professional, or other similar organizations when the approval of the Secretary of Defense, or
designee, is required by section 412 of title 37, U.S.C., and sections 4110 and 4111 of title 5,
U.S.C..

   E1.4. Exercise the authority delegated to the Secretary of Defense by the Administrator of
General Services Administration under section 102-75.1055 of the Federal Management
Regulation for the disposal of surplus personal property.

   E1.5. Develop, establish, and maintain an active and continuing records management
program pursuant to section 3102 of title 44, U.S.C., and DoD Directive 5015.2.

    E1.6. Use the Government-wide commercial purchase card for making appropriate
purchases of material and services, other than personal services, for the DoDHRA when it is
determined more advantageous and consistent with the best interests of the Government.

    E1.7. Authorize the publication of advertisements, notices, or proposals in newspapers,
magazines, or other public periodicals, as required, for the effective administration and operation
of the DoDHRA, consistent with section 3702 of title 44, U.S.C..

    E1.8. Establish and maintain, for the functions assigned, an appropriate publications system
for the promulgation of regulations, instructions, and reference documents, and changes thereto,
pursuant to the policies and procedures prescribed in DoD 5025.01.


    E1.9. Enter into interdepartmental and intragovernmental support and service agreements, as
the receiver or supplier, with other DoD Components, non-DoD Federal Government
Departments and Agencies, and State and local governments, as required for the effective
performance of DoDHRA responsibilities and functions, consistent with section 1535 of title 31,
U.S.C., and DoD Instruction 4000.19.


    E1.10. Enter into and administer contracts, either directly or through a Military Department,
a DoD contract administration services component, or other Federal Agency, as appropriate, for
supplies, equipment, and services required to accomplish the mission of the DoDHRA. To the
extent that any law or Executive order specifically limits the exercise of such authority to
persons at the Secretarial level of a Military Department, such authority shall be exercised by the
appropriate Under Secretary or Assistant Secretary of Defense.

    E1.11. The Director, DoDHRA, may redelegate these authorities, as appropriate and in
writing, except as otherwise provided by law or regulation.




Change 1, 04/06/2017                             8                                ENCLOSURE 1
