                              Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 5535.12
                                                                              September 13, 2013
                                                      Incorporating Change 2, September 23, 2025

                                                                                        ATSD(PA)

SUBJECT:      DoD Branding and Trademark Licensing Program Implementation

References: See Enclosure 1

1. PURPOSE. This instruction implements the DoD Branding and Trademark Licensing
Program pursuant to DoD Directive (DoDD) 5535.09 (Reference (a)), section 2260 of Title 10,
United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (b)), and sections 1051 through 1127 of Title 15, U.S.C.
(Reference (c)), in accordance with the authority in DoDD 5122.05 (Reference (d)), to provide
oversight, assign responsibilities, and prescribe procedures of the program.


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in
this instruction as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy in accordance with Reference (a) to establish and maintain a
program to license marks owned or controlled by DoD Components, to protect such marks from
unauthorized use, and, at the discretion of the OSD and DoD Components concerned, to register
such marks with the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) when doing so is in
the best interest of the DoD.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

   a. Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs (ATSD(PA)). The ATSD(PA):

        (1) Issues guidance to the OSD and DoD Components regarding the licensing of marks
and the operation of a trademark licensing program as is necessary to carry out the policies and
objectives set forth in Reference (a) and this instruction in accordance with Reference (b).
                                                             DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


     (2) Establishes policies and procedures to govern, register, protect, and license OSD
Component marks.

       (3) Designates a Manager, DoD Branding and Trademark Program, from within the
Community and Public Outreach Directorate to provide general oversight of the DoD Branding
and Trademark Licensing Program in accordance with paragraph 1 of Enclosure 2.

    b. OSD and DoD Components Heads. The OSD and DoD Components heads, at their
discretion, establish trademark licensing programs within their Components, and issue additional
guidance as needed to operate such programs in accordance with References (a), (b), (c), and this
instruction, and shall designate a program manager to oversee each trademark licensing program
operating within their Component and to serve on the DoD Trademark Licensing Program
Working Group.

    c. General Counsel of the Department of Defense (GC DoD). In addition to paragraph 5b of
this enclosure, the GC DoD, provides guidance and counsel to the Manager, DoD Branding and
Trademark Licensing Program, and designates a representative to serve on the OSD Component
Trademark Council in accordance with paragraphs 3c and 3d of Enclosure 2.

    d. Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of
Defense (USD(C)/CFO); Secretary of the Army; and Director, Washington Headquarters
Services (WHS). In addition to paragraph 5b of this enclosure, the USD(C)/CFO; the Secretary
of the Army; and the Director, designate a representative to serve on the OSD Component
Trademark Council in accordance with paragraphs 3c and 3d of Enclosure 2.

    e. Director, Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS). The Director, DFAS,
establishes procedures for the management of trademark licensing funds in accordance with
References (a) and (b), DoD 7000.14-R (Reference (e)), and this instruction.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. The changes to this issuance:

   a. Comply with Executive Orders 14149 and 14202 (References (o) and (p)).

   b. Administratively update references and organizational titles for accuracy.




Change 2, 09/23/2025                            2
                                                         DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective September 13, 2013.




                                            George E. Little
                                            Assistant to the Secretary of Defense
                                             for Public Affairs

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Procedures
Glossary




Change 2, 09/23/2025                       3
                                                         DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


                                     ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES

(a)   DoD Directive 5535.09, “DoD Branding and Trademark Licensing Program,”
      December 19, 2007
(b)   Sections 112 and 2260 of Title 10, United States Code
(c)   Sections 1051 through 1127 of Title 15, United States Code
(d)   DoD Directive 5122.05, “Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
      (ATSD(PA)),” August 7, 2017
(e)   DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation (DoD FMR),”
      Volumes 1-16, date varies by volume
(f)   DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
      Management Program,” July 10, 2009, as amended
(g)   Subpart 2635.702 of Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations
(h)   Sections 506 and 1017 of Title 18, United States Code
(i)   DoD Instruction 5410.19, Volume 1, “Community Outreach Activities: Policy Overview
      and Evaluation Procedures,” September 29, 2021, as amended
(j)   DoD Instruction 1015.15, “Establishment, Management, and Control of Nonappropriated
      Fund Instrumentalities and Financial Management of Supporting Resources,”
      October 31, 2007, as amended
(k)   DoD Instruction 8170.01, “Online Information Management and Electronic Messaging,”
      January 2, 2019, as amended
(l)   DoD Manual 4160.21, “Defense Materiel Disposition,” October 22, 2015, as amended
(m)   DoD Directive 5110.04, “Washington Headquarters Services (WHS),” March 27, 2013, as
      amended
(n)   DoD Instruction 1015.10, “Military Morale, Welfare, and Recreation (MWR) Programs,”
      July 6, 2009, as amended
(o)   Executive Order 14149, “Restoring Freedom of Speech and Ending Federal Censorship,”
      January 20, 2025
(p)   Executive Order 14202, “Eradicating Anti-Christian Bias,” February 6, 2025




Change 2, 09/23/2025                        4                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                             DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                        PROCEDURES


1. MANAGER OF THE DOD BRANDING AND TRADEMARK LICENSING PROGRAM.
The Manager, DoD Branding and Trademark Licensing Program, provides general oversight of
the DoD Branding and Trademark Licensing Program and will:

   a. Issue additional program guidance as needed in accordance with References (a), (b), (c),
and this instruction.

    b. As needed, review accounting reports maintained by OSD and DoD Components pursuant
to Volume 12, chapter 31 of Reference (e).

   c. In accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5105.18 (Reference (f)), establish and chair a
DoD Trademark Licensing Program Working Group composed of full-time or permanent part-
time federal employees; the Working Group shall operate as outlined in paragraph 2b of this
enclosure.

   d. In accordance with Reference (f), establish and chair an OSD Component Trademark
Council comprised of full-time or permanent part-time federal employees; the Council shall
operate as outlined in paragraphs 3c and 3d of this enclosure.

    e. Assist the OSD and DoD Components as appropriate when requested to advise on matters
related to the operation of a trademark licensing program in accordance with Reference (a) and
this instruction.

  f. In coordination with the DoD Office of the General Counsel (OGC) and the OSD
Component concerned, provide guidance on actions that may be taken to protect OSD
Component marks when an unauthorized use of the marks is discovered.

    g. In coordination with DoD OGC and the OSD Component(s) and/or DoD Component(s)
concerned, facilitate action as appropriate to protect DoD marks when an unauthorized use of the
protected marks of more than one DoD Component, or a combination of the marks of an OSD
Component and the marks of a DoD Component, is discovered.

  h. In coordination with the OSD Components, maintain a complete roster of OSD
Component marks.


2. TRADEMARK LICENSING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESS

    a. Each OSD and DoD Component shall provide oversight and management of all marks
owned or controlled by the Component. This includes but is not limited to establishing policies
for the creation of marks for official use; monitoring marks for, and protecting them against,



Change 2, 09/23/2025                           5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


unauthorized use; and, as appropriate, licensing marks for authorized use by non-DoD entities,
and registering marks with the USPTO.

    b. Members of the DoD Trademark Licensing Working Group shall consist of the program
manager of each DoD and OSD Component trademark licensing program. The attorneys who
are the principal legal advisors to program managers on trademark matters may also participate
as full members of the Working Group. The Coast Guard, when it is a Service in the Department
of Homeland Security, may participate similarly in the proceedings and meetings of the Working
Group. The Manager, DoD Branding and Trademark Licensing Program, may, from time to
time, solicit the views and assistance of technical advisors as necessary to meet the requirements
and goals of Reference (a) and this instruction. The purpose of the Working Group is to
encourage implementation of common procedures and policies across all DoD organizations
operating trademark licensing programs and to facilitate internal communication on issues that
apply to the joint DoD trademark licensing community. The DoD Trademark Licensing
Working Group shall meet monthly.

    c. OSD and DoD Components operating a trademark licensing program shall, to the extent it
is practical and appropriate, strive to develop common requirements that must be met by
licensees to secure licenses for DoD marks, royalty rates to be paid on the sale of licensed
products or services, and product quality standards that are appropriate for the type of product or
service being licensed.

    d. In accordance with subpart 2635.702 of Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference
(g)), DoD marks may not be licensed for use in a manner that creates a perception of DoD
endorsement of any non-federal entity or its products and services. DoD marks may not be
licensed for any purpose intended to promote ideological movements, sociopolitical change,
specific interpretations of morality, or legislative/statutory change. Marks may not be
fraudulently or wrongfully affixed pursuant to sections 506 and 1017 of Title 18, U.S.C.
(Reference (h)).

    e. DoD marks may not be licensed for use in a manner that would reflect negatively on the
DoD; degrade the name, reputation, or public goodwill of the DoD Components; or be contrary
to community relations objectives established in Volume 1 of DoDI 5410.19 (Reference (i)).

    f. The program manager of each OSD and DoD Component trademark licensing program
shall ensure the program under his or her control is operated in compliance with the following
financial management and reporting requirements:

     (1) A complete and accurate accounting of all trademark licensing fees received by the
Component, including the disposition of such fees, shall be maintained in accordance with
Volume 12, chapter 31 of Reference (e).

       (2) Ensure all monies received from trademark licenses are safeguarded, recorded, and
promptly transferred to the Component’s designated U.S. Department of the Treasury account
for Trademark Licensing in accordance with Volume 12, chapter 31 of Reference (e).




Change 2, 09/23/2025                             6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


       (3) Upon request, all accounting records required under Volume 12, chapter 31 of
Reference (e) shall be reported to the Manager, DoD Branding and Trademark Licensing
Program.

   g. Trademark licensing fees shall only be used for:

        (1) Payment of the costs of securing trademark registrations and the costs of operating
the licensing program as those costs are defined in the Glossary of this instruction.

        (2) OSD or DoD Component morale, welfare, and recreation (MWR) activities to the
extent (if any) that the total amount of the licensing fees available in a fiscal year exceeds the
total amount needed for that fiscal year’s costs and costs for the subsequent 2 fiscal years as
described in paragraph 2g(1) of this enclosure. Reasonable controls over trademark licensing
program expenses shall be implemented.

        (3) Licensing fees not used for costs described in paragraph 2g(1) of this enclosure shall
be transferred to an OSD or DoD Component MWR activity in accordance with Volume 12,
chapter 31 of Reference (e) before the end of the fiscal year that is 2 years after the fiscal year in
which the fees were collected.

   h. Requests and approvals for use of trademark licensing fees.

        (1) Requests for use of funds deposited in a Component’s designated U.S. Department of
Treasury account for Trademark Licensing shall be initiated by the program manager or by such
other individuals or offices designated the authority to do so by the Component concerned in
accordance with Reference (e).

        (2) The individual or office designated in accordance with Volume 12, chapter 31 of
Reference (e) to review and approve requests for the use of funds deposited in the Component’s
designated U.S. Department of Treasury account for Trademark Licensing shall ensure that funds
are only used for authorized purposes in accordance with paragraph 2g and its subparagraphs of
this enclosure.

    i. The provisions of paragraphs 2f through 2h of this enclosure requiring use of the
Component’s designated U.S. Department of the Treasury account for deposit of trademark
licensing program receipts do not apply to trademark licensing program activities of
nonappropriated fund instrumentalities (NAFIs) undertaken under authority of section 2260 of
Reference (b). Components may authorize NAFIs to retain trademark licensing fee receipts in
organizational NAFI fund accounts when generated from the licensing of marks that the NAFI
creates and/or are controls. NAFIs shall use such fee receipts for licensing and MWR activity
costs. Accounting for such fees shall be in accordance with Volume 13, chapter 1 of Reference
(e) and DoDI 1015.15 (Reference (j)).

   j. OSD and DoD Components may authorize their licensees to identify themselves as
“Official Licensees” of the DoD Component concerned. Licensees who identify themselves as
such in printed form, including on product packaging, promotional materials and web sites, shall



Change 2, 09/23/2025                              7                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


display prominently a non-endorsement disclaimer such as, “Endorsement by the United States
Department of Defense or [the DoD Component Concerned] is not intended nor implied.”
Licensees may not state they are a partner, or imply any further association, with DoD or the
DoD Component concerned as a result of the license agreement.

    k. OSD and DoD Components may establish web pages that list their authorized licensees.
Names of authorized licensees with hyperlinks to the licensees’ web sites may be displayed
provided the web page on which the names are displayed is clearly identified as being a listing of
authorized licensees, and is done in such a manner that no licensee is given prominence over
another. In no case may a Component endorse or in any way indicate that the products or
services of one licensee are superior to the products or services of any other entity. Components
establishing such a web page must prominently display an external links disclaimer compliant
with DoDI 8170.01 (Reference (k)), such as shown at Figure 1.

                                  Figure 1. Webpage Disclaimer


  The appearance of external hyperlinks does not constitute endorsement by the United States
  Department of Defense of linked web sites or the information, products, or services
  contained therein. For other than authorized activities such as military exchanges and
  morale, welfare and recreation sites, the United States Department of Defense does not
  exercise any editorial control over the information you may find at these locations. All
  links are provided consistent with the mission of this web site.


    l. All authorizations for the use of a DoD mark shall be made in the form of a license,
regardless of whether fees are received or not. All such licenses shall:

       (1) Identify in detail the marks the licensee is authorized to use.

       (2) Provide quality control guidelines for the licensee’s items bearing the marks.

       (3) Describe the manner in which the marks may be reproduced and used.

       (4) Specify the term or duration of such authorization.

       (5) Be executed in coordination with the Component’s servicing legal counsel.

    m. Licenses may include terms that require licensees (including license applicants) to submit
product samples to an OSD or DoD Component trademark licensing program to facilitate quality
control monitoring of items bearing marks owned or controlled by the Component. When
requiring such product samples, Components shall inform licensees in writing that samples will
not be returned unless their return is requested prior to delivery; that the licensee bears all costs
for delivery and return of samples; and that the U.S. Government disclaims all responsibility for
the damage or loss of samples requested for return. Disposition of unreturned samples no longer




Change 2, 09/23/2025                             8                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


needed by the Component for official use shall be in accordance with DoD Manual 4160.21
(Reference (l)).

     n. OSD and DoD Components shall not receive in-kind goods or services as consideration
for issuing a license to use marks owned or controlled by the Component. Requests for
exceptions to this policy may be approved by the Manager, DoD Branding and Trademark
Licensing Program, in coordination with the Component’s servicing legal counsel when doing so
is in the best interest of the DoD.

    o. OSD and DoD Components shall not issue licenses that grant to a licensee the exclusive
use of marks owned or controlled by the Component. Exceptions to this policy may be approved
by the Manager, DoD Branding and Trademark Licensing Program, in coordination with the
Component’s servicing legal counsel when doing so is in the best interest of the DoD.

    p. OSD and DoD Components shall not issue licenses in a manner that constitutes
preferential treatment or selective benefit of the licensee.

    q. Notifications, including cease and desist letters sent by an OSD or DoD Component
regarding the unauthorized use of a DoD mark, shall be coordinated with the Component’s
servicing legal counsel. OSD Components shall report such notifications to the Manager, DoD
Branding and Trademark Licensing Program.


3. GOVERNANCE OF OSD COMPONENT MARKS

   a. The seal of the Department of Defense is reserved for official use only, pursuant to section
112 of Reference (b) and DoDD 5110.04 (Reference (m)).

    b. Within 60 days of the publication of this instruction, OSD Components shall create a
roster of official marks currently owned or controlled by the Component using the template in
the appendix to this enclosure. Rosters shall be forwarded to the Manager, DoD Branding and
Trademark Licensing Program, and will be compiled into a master roster of OSD Component
marks. OSD Components shall maintain the currency of rosters and shall forward updated
rosters to the Manager, DoD Branding and Trademark Licensing Program, as marks are
established or disestablished for use within the Component.

   c. The OSD Component Trademark Council shall be chaired by the Manager, DoD Branding
and Trademark Licensing Program, and shall in addition consist of a representative from:

       (1) DoD OGC, who shall be the functional expert on all legal matters related to the
operation of OSD Component trademark licensing programs; protection of OSD marks from
unauthorized use; and registration of OSD marks with the USPTO.

        (2) Office of the USD(C)/CFO, who shall be the functional expert on all finance matters
related to the operation of OSD Component trademark licensing programs.




Change 2, 09/23/2025                            9                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


        (3) Office of the Administrative Assistant to the Secretary of the Army, The Institute of
Heraldry, who shall advise the Council Chair and OSD Components on matters of heraldry and
the heraldic implications of existing and proposed design marks used within OSD.

       (4) WHS OGC, who shall advise the Council Chair and OSD Components on all matters
regarding use of the seal of the DoD.

     (5) WHS Graphics and Presentations Division, who shall advise the Council Chair and
OSD Components on matters related to the creation of design marks for use within OSD.

   d. The purpose of the OSD Component Trademark Council is to provide subject matter
expertise and program guidance to the OSD Components; upon request, assist the OSD
Components with USPTO registrations; steer the overall governance of marks owned or
controlled by OSD Components; and exercise primary governance of OSD marks not owned or
controlled by a single OSD Component. The Council shall meet quarterly, at minimum.

    e. In accordance with Reference (a) and this instruction, OSD Components are encouraged
to register marks under their control with the USPTO that they deem to have a commercial value
or when they determine the registration of marks is appropriate to address unauthorized use or
infringement. The OSD Component Trademark Council shall assist OSD Components with
USPTO registrations upon request. The process for requesting such assistance requires that:

        (1) The program manager, individual, or office authorized by the Component head to
manage the mark shall submit a request for trademark registration review to the Manager, DoD
Branding and Trademark Licensing Program. The request shall include a copy and/or textual
description of the mark; the proposed classification of goods and services in which the mark will
be registered; and justification supporting trademark registration.

        (2) The OSD Component Trademark Council will conduct the trademark registration
review no later than at its next scheduled meeting. Following review, the OSD Component
Trademark Council will provide recommendations and guidance to the requesting Component
regarding issues such as the design of the mark; appropriate goods and services classifications
for trademark registration; procedures for protecting registered marks from unauthorized use;
and as appropriate, procedures for licensing the mark and managing any licensing fees received.

        (3) The DoD OGC will coordinate with the requesting OSD Component, as appropriate,
to identify an attorney of record to support the preparation, filing, and prosecution of a trademark
registration. The requesting Component shall generally be responsible for funding registration
fees and other costs associated with the initial registration and subsequent renewals of the
registration.




Change 2, 09/23/2025                            10                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                            DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


                               APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 2

                  TEMPLATE FOR OSD COMPONENT MARK ROSTER

OSD Components shall use the template depicted in Figure 2 when submitting a roster of marks.
An electronic version of the template is available upon request from the Manager, DoD Branding
and Trademark Licensing Program, Office of the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public
Affairs (OATSD(PA)).

                     Figure 2. Template for OSD Component Mark Roster




Change 2, 09/23/2025                          11              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 ATSD(PA)         Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs

 DFAS             Defense Accounting and Finance Service
 DoDD             DoD directive
 DoDI             DoD instruction

 GC DoD           General Counsel of the Department of Defense

 MWR              morale, welfare, and recreation

 NAFI             nonappropriated fund instrumentality

 OATSD(PA)        Office of the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
 OGC              Office of General Counsel

 U.S.C.     United States Code
 USD(C)/CFO Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
            Department of Defense
 USPTO      United States Patent and Trademark Office

 WHS              Washington Headquarters Service

                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

cost of securing trademark registration. This may, at the discretion of the DoD Component head
concerned, include:

    Fees paid to secure and maintain the registration of trademarks, service marks, certification
marks, and collective marks with USPTO, the trademark office of any State or U.S. territory or
foreign governmental entity, and the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Bureau.

    Salaries and wages of civilian personnel providing the services described in the previous
paragraph. This includes salaries; fringe benefits; leave and holiday factors, when applicable;
DoD-funded civilian retirement costs; health and life insurance; and civilian retirement costs not
funded by DoD appropriations.

costs of operating the licensing program. This may, at the discretion of the DoD Component
head concerned, include:




Change 2, 09/23/2025                             12                                   GLOSSARY
                                                              DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013


    Salaries and wages of civilian personnel working on the DoD Component’s trademark
licensing program to include salaries; fringe benefits; leave and holiday factors, when applicable;
DoD-funded civilian retirement costs; health and life insurance; and other civilian retirement
costs not funded by DoD appropriations.

    Contractor support and administration costs. Tradeshows and other promotion and marketing
expenses are included in this definition to the extent their primary function is to enhance brand
development and commercial value through increased public awareness of the marks. The cost
of ensuring licensees adhere to product quality standards; the cost of enforcing exclusive rights
against unauthorized use of marks by third parties; and similar costs; are other examples, not
intended to be all inclusive, of contractor support and administration costs that may be included.

    Travel and miscellaneous administrative support costs. Training costs are included in this
definition to the extent that such training is required to ensure personnel working in a DoD
Component’s trademark licensing program are provided the necessary education and skills to
efficiently operate the program in accordance with the goals and guidelines set forth in Reference
(a) and this instruction.

license. A written document that authorizes or gives official permission to a person, group, or
organization to use a mark owned by a DoD Component. Such documents shall, at a minimum,
provide quality control guidelines, specify the marks the licensee is authorized to use, the manner
in which the marks may be reproduced, and the term or duration of such authorization. When
used as a verb it means the act of issuing such a written document to the person or organization
who is receiving authorization to use a mark owned by a DoD Component.

licensee. Defined in Reference (a).

mark. Any trademark, service mark, certification mark, or collective mark as defined by section
1127 of Reference (c) that is owned or controlled by a DoD Component. This includes but is not
limited to words, names, seals, emblems, symbols, slogans, designs, logos, heraldic images,
military operation designations, medals, insignia, the names or likenesses of military weapon
systems, and other visual or aural displays in use or intended to be used by a DoD Component.
This also encompasses registered trademarks and common law trademarks.

MWR activity. An authorized activity of an MWR program as defined in DoDI 1015.10
(Reference (n)).

NAFI. Defined in Reference (j).

OSD Components. The DoD Working Capital Fund Activities, DoD Field Activities, DoD
Agencies, and all other DoD Components, excluding the Military Departments.

OSD Component mark. A mark that is owned or controlled by an OSD Component. It also
includes marks such as names of military operations, words, names, slogans, designs, symbols,
medals, insignia, and the names or likenesses of weapon systems that are used by multiple DoD
Components.




Change 2, 09/23/2025                            13                                   GLOSSARY
                                                           DoDI 5535.12, September 13, 2013



program manager. The person designated as the director or head of a trademark licensing
program operated by an OSD or DoD Component.

roster. A listing of all marks owned or controlled by an OSD Component.

trademark licensing program. Defined in Reference (a).




Change 2, 09/23/2025                          14                                 GLOSSARY
