                           DOW INSTRUCTION 5160.71
                      DOW LANGUAGE TESTING PROGRAM

Originating Component:      Office of the Under Secretary of War for Personnel and Readiness

Effective:                  June 30, 2022
Change 1 Effective:         February 11, 2026

Releasability:              Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division Website
                            at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Reissues and Cancels:       DoD Instruction 5160.71, “DoD Language Testing Program,” January 26,
                            2009, as amended

Approved by:                Gilbert R. Cisneros, Jr., Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                            Readiness
Change 1 Approved by:       Anthony J. Tata, Under Secretary of War for Personnel and Readiness


Purpose: In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02, this issuance:
• Establishes policies, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for developing and
administering the Defense Language Aptitude Battery (DLAB); the Defense Language Proficiency Test
(DLPT) system tests in reading, listening, and speaking; and other DoW-approved assessment tools.
• Implements policies and assigns responsibilities for DoW language testing programs pursuant to
DoDD 5160.41E and in accordance with DoDD 5124.02.
• Defines responsibilities for the Secretary of the Army, as the DoW Executive Agent for the Defense
Language Institute Foreign Language Center (DLIFLC), for developing DoW-wide foreign language
testing pursuant to DoDD 5160.41E.
• Defines responsibilities for the Secretary of the Air Force, as the DoW Executive Agent for the
Defense Language Institute English Language Center (DLIELC), for developing DoW-wide English
language testing pursuant to DoDD 5160.41E.
                                                                                                    DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                                                    Change 1, February 11, 2026

                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Policy. ............................................................................................................................... 3
   1.3. Summary of Change 1. ..................................................................................................... 4
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES ......................................................................................................... 5
   2.1. Assistant Secretary of War for Readiness. ........................................................................ 5
   2.2. Deputy Assistant Secretary of War for Military Personnel Policy. ................................. 5
   2.3. Deputy Assistant Secretary of War for Civilian Personnel Policy. .................................. 5
   2.4. Director, Department of Defense Human Resources Activity.......................................... 5
   2.5. DoW SLA. ........................................................................................................................ 6
   2.6. Directors of the NSA/CSS, Defense Intelligence Agency, Defense Counterintelligence
       and Security Agency, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, Defense Threat
       Reduction Agency, and Defense Security Cooperation Agency. ....................................... 7
   2.7. Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Commandant, United States Coast
       Guard................................................................................................................................. 10
   2.8. Secretary of the Army. .................................................................................................... 13
   2.9. Secretary of the Air Force. .............................................................................................. 14
SECTION 3: PROCEDURES .............................................................................................................. 16
   3.1. Requests to Use DoW Language Tests Outside the DoW. ............................................. 16
   3.2. Introducing New Web-Delivered Tests. ......................................................................... 16
   3.3. Requesting Certification and Approval of Non-DLPT System Tests............................. 16
   3.4. Requesting CA Test ECL (CATECL) Delivery on Non-U.S. Government–Owned
       Equipment. ........................................................................................................................ 17
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 19
   G.1. Acronyms. ...................................................................................................................... 19
   G.2. Definitions. ..................................................................................................................... 20
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 22




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                                   DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                   Change 1, February 11, 2026

               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY.

This issuance applies to OSW, the Military Departments (including the Coast Guard at all times,
including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security by agreement with that
Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the
Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector General of the Department of War, the Defense
Agencies, the DoW Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoW
(referred to collectively in this issuance as the “DoW Components”).


1.2. POLICY.

It is DoW policy that:

    a. The DLPT system, which consists of DoW foreign and English language testing, is
essential to the DoW Language, Regional Expertise, and Culture Program. The DLPT system
oversight and security is critical due to the role the system plays in the DoW’s ability to
determine readiness by measuring and validating the DoW Components’ language capabilities.
The DLPT system also promotes developing language proficiency that supports the DoW
Building Partnership Capacity Program.

    b. The DLAB is the preferred test battery authorized for assessing DoW personnel’s aptitude
for learning a foreign language.

    c. Except as authorized by public law or in accordance with Paragraph 3.3. of this issuance,
the DLPT system tests are the only test battery authorized for:

        (1) Assessing DoW personnel’s foreign language proficiency and determining
qualifications for receiving a foreign language proficiency bonus (FLPB) for Service members
pursuant to DoD Instruction (DoDI) 1340.27 or foreign language proficiency pay (FLPP) for
civilian personnel in the DoW pursuant to Volume 2016 of DoDI 1400.25.

       (2) Administering foreign language pay for defense civilian intelligence personnel
system employees pursuant to Volume 2016 of DoDI 1400.25. (See Paragraph 2.6.i.(2)(b) for an
Interagency Language Roundtable (ILR) skill level 3 recertification exception).

    d. All enlisted personnel entering military service who attend language training at the
DLIFLC will be screened for language aptitude. Screening involves either administering the
DLAB or using a DoW -approved assessment tool (e.g., the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude
Battery or the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT)) based on math and verbal elements of
the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery. Officer and civilian personnel will be
administered the DLAB at the discretion of the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the
directors of the Defense Agencies and DoW Field Activities.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                            3
                                                                   DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                   Change 1, February 11, 2026
    e. Using the DLAB or DLPT in non-DoW agencies, except the Coast Guard, or delivering
the computer-based or web-delivered DoW Language Testing Program system tests outside the
Office of People Analytics (OPA) delivery channels, will require the express written approval of
the DoW Senior Language Authority (SLA).

    f. The Oral Proficiency Interview-English (OPI-E), the English Comprehension Level (ECL)
test, and the English Language Proficiency Test (ELPT) are the preferred tests the DoW
authorizes to assess a non-native English speaker’s English language proficiency.

    g. Using the OPI-E, ECL, computer-adaptive (CA) ECL, or ELPT in non-DoW agencies,
except the Coast Guard, or delivering the computer-based or web-delivered English language
tests outside the OPA delivery channels, will require the express written approval of the DoW
SLA.


1.3. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1.

This change updates:

   a. The waiting period to take the DLPT from 270 calendar days to 180 calendar days.

   b. Secondary titles in accordance with the October 10, 2025 Secretary of War Memorandum.

   c. Reference citations.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                         4
                                                                  DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                  Change 1, February 11, 2026

                          SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF WAR FOR READINESS.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of War for Personnel and
Readiness (USW(P&R)), the Assistant Secretary of War for Readiness develops and oversees
policy guidance for the DoW Language Testing Program.


2.2. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF WAR FOR MILITARY PERSONNEL
POLICY.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the Assistant Secretary of War for Manpower and
Reserve Affairs, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of War for Military Personnel Policy:

   a. Develops procedures for the U.S. Military Entrance Processing Command, through
Accession Policy, to administer the DLPT system tests, DLAB, and ELPTs.

  b. Provides oversight, through Accession Policy, for the U.S. Military Entrance Processing
Command to administer these DoW language tests in accordance with Military Department and
OPA system requirements:

       (1) The DLPT system, to test applicants who have a self-professed knowledge of a
foreign language and require the validation of this knowledge for job classification.

       (2) The DLAB, to assess applicants’ aptitude for learning languages.

       (3) The ELPTs, to assess English language proficiency for non-native English-speaking
applicants.


2.3. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF WAR FOR CIVILIAN PERSONNEL
POLICY.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the Assistant Secretary of War for Manpower and
Reserve Affairs, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of War for Civilian Personnel Policy tracks
civilian language capabilities and coordinates on language requirements against language
inventory to assess gaps.


2.4. DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE HUMAN RESOURCES ACTIVITY.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the USW(P&R), the Director, Department of
Defense Human Resources Activity:




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                      5
                                                                    DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                    Change 1, February 11, 2026
    a. Oversees DLAB and DLPT system activities related to computer-based or web-delivered
test administration and delivery, research and development, and quality control to ensure that all
are consistent with DoW SLA general policies.

   b. Implements quality assurance procedures to ensure the accuracy and security of
computer-based or web-delivered DoW foreign language and English language test
administration and delivery.

   c. Provides quarterly tracking reports to the DoW SLA on the computer-based or
web-delivered DoW language tests showing test implementation schedules and costs, research
and development initiatives, and test administration or delivery irregularities.

    d. Establishes DoW language testing policies and procedures related to OPA testing
activities (e.g., nomination process, authentication, scoring, score reporting) for DoW
Components.

    e. In coordination with the DoW SLA, is the responsible authority for all web-delivered
language test environments, including granting permission for test delivery and establishing and
enforcing policies and procedures that ensure system test security.

  f. Provides technical assistance to all testing locations that conduct DoW web-delivered
DoW language testing.

    g. Provides test results to DLIELC and DLIFLC to enable item analysis and test
performance evaluation.

    h. Collaborates with DLIELC and DLIFLC to establish and maintain the tests’ psychometric
integrity.

   i. Plans for continuing test delivery during an extended Internet outage.


2.5. DOW SLA.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the USW(P&R), through the Assistant Secretary of
War for Readiness, the DoW SLA:

   a. Exercises overall responsibility for the DoW Language Testing Program.

   b. Provides policy direction for the DoW Language Testing Program.

   c. Coordinates DoW language testing policy with the Military Departments and the Defense
Agencies, as appropriate.

    d. Establishes and coordinates procedures to provide testing advice and guidance that ensure
that the DoW Language Testing Program follows the highest national testing principles and
standards.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        6
                                                                      DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                      Change 1, February 11, 2026
    e. Approves or rejects non-DLPT system tests, except National Security Agency/Central
Security Service (NSA/CSS) reading and listening tests that the Commandant, DLIFLC has
certified suitable for proficiency testing and paying FLPP or FLPB for languages with no DLPT
system test.

    f. Approves or rejects requests to use DoW language tests for external organizations,
including foreign government requests or requests to deliver the computer-based or
web-delivered language tests outside the routine OPA delivery channels.

    g. Approves developing other tools to assess language proficiency and aptitude to learn a
foreign language.

    h. Provides guidance for continuing or suspending testing due to an extended Internet
outage, if required.

    i. Tracks DoW language capabilities and coordinates on language requirements against
language inventory to assess gaps.


2.6. DIRECTORS OF THE NSA/CSS, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,
DEFENSE COUNTERINTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY AGENCY, NATIONAL
GEOSPATIAL-INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, DEFENSE THREAT REDUCTION
AGENCY, AND DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION AGENCY.

Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of War for Intelligence and
Security, the Directors of the NSA/CSS, Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency,
Defense Intelligence Agency, and National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency:

Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of War for Acquisition and
Sustainment, the Director, Defense Threat Reduction Agency:

Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of War for Policy, the
Director, Defense Security Cooperation Agency:

   a. Plan, program, resource, and budget for DoW language testing activities related to test
administration.

    b. Establish policies and procedures to ensure that infrastructure and facilities are available
to support test administration.

    c. Establish policies and procedures to ensure that the SLAs are kept informed of all
significant testing issues that affect the DoW and that should be raised at Defense Language
Steering Committee meetings.

    d. Issue and implement policies and procedures governing the administration of the DoW
language tests in accordance with the policies in this issuance, including, but not limited to:

       (1) Ensuring the security of test materials.


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                           7
                                                                      DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                      Change 1, February 11, 2026
       (2) Ensuring the proper destruction and transfer of test materials.

        (3) Reporting loss, compromise, or possible compromise of test materials to DLIFLC or
DLIELC, as appropriate, at the time the incident occurs and reporting investigation results upon
their completion.

        (4) Ensuring that personnel who are found by proper authorities to have compromised or
participated in the compromise of test materials cannot take future DoW language tests.

       (5) Maintaining records of testing, test scoring, and test reporting.

   e. Ensure that a test administrator who is trained and certified in accordance with standards
and policies established by the director concerned administers the DoW language tests in a
government-controlled test environment on government-owned information technology
equipment. Ensure that test equipment is set up in accordance with system specifications and
OPA requirements. Internet access for the test environment may be obtained through a
government-controlled network or by a commercial Internet service provider.

    f. Ensure that test sites appoint test control officers in the minimum military grade of E-6 or
civilian grade of General Schedule (GS)-7. The DLPT5 and other computer-based or web-
delivered foreign and English language tests require an additional test administrator certification
as established by OPA.

    g. Administer the DLAB no earlier than 180 calendar days from the last test administration
to an individual, unless the agency grants an exception to policy for a specific individual to retest
within 180 calendar days. When an agency grants an exception to policy, there is no restriction
on how soon the individual can retest; however, individuals can take the DLAB only twice in a
12-month period.

    h. Administer the DLPT system foreign language tests no earlier than 180 calendar days
from the last test administration in that modality and language or dialect for a given individual
unless approved for waiver to retest early based on completion of a significant language training
event in that language or dialect, pending deployment, entering a Service-sponsored school, or
meeting a requirement for advancement eligibility. The same person may not take more than
two iterations of the same test in a 12-month period.

    i. Administer the upper-range (UR) DLPT5 tests only to personnel who have achieved a
Federal Government ILR level of 3 for the relevant modality on the lower-range (LR) DLPT5 in
that language.

       (1) An individual may take the initial UR test immediately after the score for the LR test
has been posted to the DLPT Authorization and Reporting System, but they must take it within
90 calendar days from the LR test date. Only a score of 3+ or 4 is recorded for the UR test.

       (2) The administration of subsequent UR tests requires one of two qualifications:

           (a) An ILR skill level score of 3 on the LR test taken within the last 90 calendar
days; or


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                         8
                                                                    DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                    Change 1, February 11, 2026
           (b) An ILR skill level score of at least 3+ on the previous UR test taken within the
last 12 months or, in the case of a DoW Component that permits testing every 2 or 3 years for
personnel who score above ILR skill level 3 on a test, within the last 24 months or 36 months.

     j. Administer the very low-range DLPT5 tests to personnel when greater fidelity is required
at the 0+ to 1+ skill levels.

    k. Administer the CA tests to all personnel who previously tested on the DLPT in that
language.

    l. Administer the oral proficiency interview (OPI) to any requesting personnel, especially
those whose primary duties include using the speaking modality.

   m. Administer the DLPT system tests to DoW contractor personnel when the directors of the
Defense Agencies and DoW Field Activities deem it appropriate and necessary.

    n. Establish policies for granting mission-related waivers for required language
recertification with the DLPT system tests.

    o. Review and approve requests for release of examinee test scores, except for test score data
routinely provided to examinees, OPA, and DoW Components.

    p. When there is no DLPT system test to certify proficiency for a DoW-approved foreign
language, except for NSA/CSS reading and listening tests, request certification of a non-DLPT
system test from the Commandant, DLIFLC. The directors also send a copy to the DoW SLA
and, for intelligence agencies, send a copy to the Human Capital Management Office in the
Office of the Under Secretary of War for Intelligence and Security, unless existing legislation for
a specific agency allows otherwise.

   q. Designate a point of contact to serve as a clearinghouse for test-development matters with
DLIFLC. The point of contact:

          (1) Participates in Defense Language Testing Working Group (DLTWG) meetings.

          (2) Coordinates with DLIFLC on DLPT system foreign language test-development
issues.

        (3) Provides annual, informal estimates to DLIFLC, by language and number of tests, for
the OPI and any other tests for which DLIFLC must provide or schedule testers or scorers, by the
end of each fiscal year.

   r. Designate a point of contact to serve as a clearinghouse for test-delivery matters. The
point of contact:

          (1) Participates in DLPT Coordination Team meetings.

        (2) Coordinates all technical test-delivery issues with OPA directly, at DLPT meetings,
or with Defense Language and National Security Education Office (DLNSEO).


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        9
                                                                      DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                      Change 1, February 11, 2026
       (3) Monitors the performance of test-delivery sites.

     (4) Circulates information from DLPT Coordination Team meetings, OPA, and
DLNSEO to test-delivery sites.

   s. Administer the ECL test and the ELPT, as necessary, to personnel in accordance with
DLIELC procedures.

   t. Agencies that do not administer tests are exempt from the provisions of the test
administration in Paragraphs 2.6.d., 2.6.e., 2.6.g. through 2.6.k., 2.6.m., and 2.6.r.


2.7. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND THE
COMMANDANT, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD.

The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Commandant, United States Coast Guard:

    a. Establish policies and procedures to ensure that infrastructure and facilities are available
to support test administration.

   b. Plan, program, resource, and budget for DoW language testing activities to support test
administration.

    c. Establish policies and procedures to ensure that the SLAs are kept informed of all
significant testing issues that affect the DoW and that should be raised at Defense Language
Steering Committee meetings.

    d. Issue and implement policies and procedures governing the administration of the DoW
language tests in accordance with the policies contained in this issuance, including, but not
limited to:

       (1) Ensuring the security of test materials.

       (2) Ensuring the proper destruction and transfer of test materials.

        (3) Reporting loss, compromise, or possible compromise of test materials to DLIFLC or
DLIELC, as appropriate, at the time the incident occurs and report investigation results upon
their completion.

        (4) Ensuring that personnel who are found by proper authorities to have compromised or
participated in the compromise of test materials cannot take future DoW language tests.

       (5) Maintaining records of testing, test scoring, and test reporting.

   e. Ensure that a test administrator who is trained and certified in accordance with standards
and policies established by the director concerned administers the DoW language tests in a
government-controlled test environment on government-owned equipment. Ensure that test
equipment is set up in accordance with system specifications and OPA requirements. Internet



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       10
                                                                      DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                      Change 1, February 11, 2026
access for the test environment may be provided by a government-controlled network or by a
commercial Internet service provider.

    f. Ensure that test sites appoint test control officers in the minimum military grade of E-6 or
civilian grade of GS-7, or non-appropriated fund employee equivalent. The DLPT5 and other
computer-based or web-delivered foreign and English language tests require an additional test
administrator certification as established by OPA.

     g. Develop procedures to administer the DLPT system tests to military accessions personnel
or enlisted personnel who have a self-professed knowledge of a foreign language within their
first enlistment term.

    h. Establish procedures to screen and track all newly commissioned officers for language
aptitude or capability. Report results to DLNSEO.

   i. Develop procedures to administer the DLPT system tests to commissioned officers who
declare a prior knowledge of a foreign language during accessions training or before reaching the
O-3 grade.

    j. Establish foreign language accession screening procedures to screen all recruits for
language aptitude with the AFQT or another DoW-approved screening tool. Ensure that
recruiters and classifiers recognize the relationship between high AFQT scores (more than 84)
and potential aptitude to learn a foreign language.

    k. Administer the DLAB no earlier than 180 calendar days from the last test administration
to an individual, unless the agency grants an exception to policy for a specific individual to retest
within 180 calendar days. When an agency grants an exception to policy, there is no restriction
on how soon the individual can retest; however, individuals can take the DLAB only twice in a
12-month period.

    l. Administer the DLPT system foreign language tests no earlier than 180 calendar days from
the last test administration in that modality and language or dialect for a given individual unless
approved for waiver to retest early based on completion of a significant language training event
in that language or dialect, pending deployment, entering a Service-sponsored school, or meeting
a requirement for advancement eligibility. The same person may not take more than two
iterations of the same test in a 12-month period.

    m. Administer the UR DLPT5 tests only to personnel who have achieved an ILR level of 3
for the relevant modality on the LR DLPT5 in that language.

        (1) The initial UR test may be taken immediately after the score for the LR test has been
posted to the DLPT Authorization and Reporting System but must be taken within 90 calendar
days from the date of the LR test. Only a score of 3+ or 4 is recorded for the UR test.

       (2) The administration of subsequent UR tests requires one of two qualifications:

           (a) An ILR skill level score of 3 on the LR test, taken within the last 90 calendar
days; or


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       11
                                                                    DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                    Change 1, February 11, 2026
           (b) An ILR skill level score of at least 3+ on the previous UR test taken within the
last 12 months or, in the case of a DoW Component that permits testing every 2 years for
personnel who score above ILR skill level 3 on a test, within the last 24 months.

    n. Administer the very low-range DLPT5 tests to any requesting personnel, particularly in
those specialties whose primary duties include using the speaking modality (e.g., United States
Special Operations Command, foreign area officers, special agents).

    o. Administer the CA tests to all personnel who previously tested on the DLPT in that
language.

    p. Administer the DLPT system foreign language tests to Military Academy and Reserve
Officer Training Corps cadets when they complete their junior year and ensure that their scores
are entered into their cadet personnel files and transferred to their active or reserve duty
personnel files.

  q. Administer the OPI to personnel whose primary duties include using the speaking
modality (e.g., United States Special Operations Command, foreign area officers, special agents).

   r. Administer the DLPT system tests to DoW contractor personnel when the Secretary
concerned deems it appropriate and necessary.

    s. Establish policies for granting mission-related waivers for required language
recertification with the DLPT system.

    t. Develop procedures to administer the DLPT system tests to military recruits or enlisted
personnel who have a self-professed knowledge of a foreign language during their first
enlistment term. These procedures must consider the fact that the written DLPTs were
developed to test the foreign language proficiency of native or near-native speakers of English
and that OPIs may be the best way to test non-native speakers of English.

    u. Review and approve requests for the release of examinee test scores, except for test score
data routinely provided to examinees, OPA, and DoW Components.

     v. Absent a DLPT system test to certify proficiency for a DoW-approved foreign language,
initiate a request for certification of a non-DLPT system test, except for NSA/CSS reading and
listening tests, to the Commandant, DLIFLC, sending a copy to the DoW SLA.

   w. Designate a point of contact to serve as a clearinghouse for test-development matters with
DLIFLC. The point of contact:

       (1) Participates in DLTWG meetings.

       (2) Coordinates with DLIFLC on DLPT system foreign language test issues.

       (3) Provides annual, informal estimates to DLIFLC, by language and number of tests, for
the OPI, and any other tests for which DLIFLC must provide or schedule testers or scorers, by
the end of the fiscal year.


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       12
                                                                    DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                    Change 1, February 11, 2026
   x. Designate a point of contact to serve as a clearinghouse for test-delivery matters. The
point of contact:

       (1) Participates in DLPT Coordination Team meetings.

        (2) Coordinates all technical test-delivery issues with OPA directly, at DLPT meetings,
or with DLNSEO.

       (3) Monitors the performance of test-delivery sites.

     (4) Circulates information from DLPT Coordination Team meetings, OPA, and
DLNSEO to test-delivery sites.

   y. Administer the ECL test and the ELPT, as necessary, to personnel in accordance with
DLIELC procedures.


2.8. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY.

In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.7., the Secretary of the Army, as the DoD
Executive Agent for DLIFLC as designated in DoDD 5160.41E:

    a. Is responsible for DoW foreign language test development, research and development,
calibration, and quality control in accordance with general policies that the USW(P&R)
established.

   b. Plans, programs, resources, and budgets for DLIFLC activities related to test
development, research and development, calibration, quality control, and scoring.

    c. Develops a comprehensive security plan that includes all aspects of test development,
design, and administration within DLIFLC.

    d. Establishes, through DLIFLC, recommended minimum DLAB aptitude scores for entry
into DLIFLC training for various languages based on categories of difficulty.

    e. Implements quality assurance procedures to ensure the accuracy and security of the
test-development process for DoW foreign language testing.

    f. Provides quarterly tracking reports to the DoW SLA showing test-development production
and implementation schedules and costs, research and development initiatives, and
test-development irregularities, as appropriate.

    g. Administers the DLPT system tests, as required, when DLIFLC students complete their
training on equipment set up in accordance with OPA system requirements.

    h. Provides to the DoW SLA, through DLIFLC, an annual test-development plan that sets
priorities for new test development and languages for new tests.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                     13
                                                                   DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                   Change 1, February 11, 2026
    i. Reports all compromises or possible compromises of test materials to the DLNSEO as
soon as possible after notification by DoW Components and reports the results of investigations
of compromises or possible compromises to DLNSEO.

    j. Establishes procedures for selecting new languages for the development of DLPT system
foreign language tests. These procedures include considering the strategic need and cost
effectiveness of the tests to be developed. The procedures are submitted to and approved by the
DoW SLA. A priority list of tests to be developed using these procedures is submitted to the
DoW SLA for approval on an annual basis.

    k. Establishes the DLTWG to coordinate and discuss technical testing matters and
recommendations for test-development priorities.

       (1) The working group comprises members appointed by the Military Departments and
other DoW Components that use the DLPT, OPI, or DLAB tests.

        (2) The chair of the working group refers policy issues and recommendations for
test-development priorities and test cut scores to the Defense Language Action Panel for
disposition and subsequent action.


2.9. SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE.In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.7.,
the Secretary of the Air Force, as the DoD Executive Agent for DLIELC as designated in DoDD
5160.41E:

    a. Is responsible for DoW English language test development, research and development,
calibration, and quality control.

    b. Plans, programs, resources, and budgets for DLIELC activities related to test
development; research; calibration; quality control; and scoring of the ECL, OPI-E, ELPT, and
future DoW-approved tests.

    c. Develops a comprehensive security plan that includes all aspects of test development,
design, and administration within DLIELC.

    d. Assists DoW Components, through DLIELC, to determine recommended ECL
proficiency scores for entry into military occupational training or education.

    e. Implements quality assurance procedures to ensure the accuracy and security of the
test-development and distribution process for DoW English language testing.

   f. Administers the OPI-E as the DoW Component heads require.

   g. Is responsible for printing, distributing, and providing English language proficiency
paper-and-pencil test materials to all DoW test control centers, as required.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                     14
                                                                  DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                  Change 1, February 11, 2026
   h. Reports all compromises or possible compromises of test materials to the DLNSEO as
soon as possible after notification by DoW Components and reports the investigation results of
compromises or possible compromises to DLNSEO.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                      15
                                                                      DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                      Change 1, February 11, 2026

                               SECTION 3: PROCEDURES

3.1. REQUESTS TO USE DOW LANGUAGE TESTS OUTSIDE THE DOW.

    a. Requests to use DoW language tests to test personnel in agencies outside the DoW, except
the Coast Guard, or to use any method of delivering the computer-based or web-delivered
language tests outside the routine OPA delivery channels will be submitted to the DoW SLA at
least 120 calendar days before any such anticipated use.

    b. Requests for such testing procedure exceptions will contain, at a minimum, the purpose
for which the test will be used; the audience to be tested; the annual number of tests to be
administered; the marginal cost for administering the tests, if any; the location of sites at which
the tests will be administered; the procedures to be used to ensure test security; and provisions
for the recovery of damages if the test is compromised while under user control.

   c. After coordinating with OPA and DLIFLC or DLIELC, as appropriate, the DoW SLA will
decide on a course of action.


3.2. INTRODUCING NEW WEB-DELIVERED TESTS.

     a. Thirty calendar days before a new DLPT5 test or other web-delivered version of a
proficiency test is released for DoW Components to use, the Commandant, DLIFLC will submit
all appropriate test data and material to OPA for installation on the web server. At the same
time, the Commandant will submit a memorandum to the DoW SLA, sending a copy to the other
SLAs, announcing the release and release date. The SLAs will ensure the widest possible
distribution of the release information within their components.

    b. OPA will install the new test on the web server within 30 calendar days from the delivery
date of all DLIFLC data and materials.

    c. During this 30-day period, DoW Components will ensure that all preparations for the new
test transition are made.

    d. For a 1-year transition period after the introduction of a new DLPT5 or DLPT5-CA, the
DoW Component heads may authorize their personnel to use their last recorded DLPT scores for
FLPP or FLPB certification and other official uses. At the end of the transition period, the
individual’s annual certification for proficiency and FLPP or FLPB will be based on the current
DLPT5 or DLPT5-CA scores.


3.3. REQUESTING CERTIFICATION AND APPROVAL OF NON-DLPT SYSTEM
TESTS.

    a. Any DoW Component that desires a foreign language proficiency test in a DoW-approved
language for which there is no DLPT system test may submit a request to the Commandant,
DLIFLC, sending a copy to the DoW SLA, for a non-DLPT system test to be certified for


SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                             16
                                                                   DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                   Change 1, February 11, 2026
proficiency testing in that language and for paying FLPP or FLPB. The request should also
include the estimated number of test takers and the annual number of tests to be administered.
NSA/CSS tests are an exception, as stated in Paragraph 3.3.e.

    b. Within 60 calendar days of the test receipt, the Commandant, DLIFLC will respond to the
requestor and the DoW SLA on whether the test will be certified to test proficiency in that
language. If the non-DLPT system test is not certified for that language, the Commandant,
DLIFLC will recommend other options for meeting the requirement.

   c. If the non-DLPT system test is certified for that language, the Commandant, DLIFLC will
provide the certification to the DoW SLA along with any certification restrictions.

    d. If the DoW SLA agrees with the certification and restrictions, they will approve the non-
DLPT system test for testing proficiency in that language and for paying FLPP or FLPB, foreign
language incentive pay, and foreign language pay for defense civilian intelligence personnel
system employees.

   e. The NSA/CSS reading and listening tests do not require the review described in
Paragraphs 3.3.a. through 3.3.d. However, they must be developed in strict compliance with the
procedures outlined in the NSA/CSS Unified Foreign Language Testing System guidelines. The
NSA/CSS SLA or their designee must approve them as tests of record.

      (1) DLNSEO, in coordination with NSA/CSS, will maintain administration procedures
for DoW Components using the NSA/CSS tests.

       (2) Use of these tests by non-NSA DoW Components will be on a space-available basis.
The cryptologic community will receive testing priority.

        (3) If all other payment criteria are met, payment of the FLPB, foreign language
incentive pay, and foreign language pay for defense civilian intelligence personnel system
employees is authorized for these tests.


3.4. REQUESTING CA TEST ECL (CATECL) DELIVERY ON NON-U.S.
GOVERNMENT–OWNED EQUIPMENT.

   a. To extend the scope of testing in partner nations, the Commandant, DLIELC may
implement CATECL administration outside the OPA communication channels on certain
non-U.S. Government–owned networks and equipment if it is pursuant to the provisions in
Paragraphs 3.4.b. and 3.4.c.

   b. U.S. Government employees only must conduct CATECL delivery on non-U.S.
Government–owned networks and equipment. These employees will personally conduct all test
examination sessions and adhere to all DLIELC testing regulations and procedures. They will
meet all OPA hardware and software requirements on the web-based DLPT authorization and
reporting website and will test only with the OPA Windows Private Desktop software.




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                            17
                                                               DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                               Change 1, February 11, 2026
   c. The Commandant, DLIELC will provide 60 calendar days’ notice to the Director,
DLNSEO of the intent to extend testing under these provisions. The Director, DLNSEO will
coordinate with the Director, OPA to ensure these provisions’ continued practicality.




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                      18
                                                        DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                        Change 1, February 11, 2026

                               GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

ACRONYM          MEANING

AFQT             Armed Forces Qualification Test

CA               computer-adaptive
CATECL           computer-adaptive test English comprehension level

DLAB             Defense Language Aptitude Battery
DLIELC           Defense Language Institute English Language Center
DLIFLC           Defense Language Institute Foreign Language Center
DLNSEO           Defense Language and National Security Education Office
DLPT             Defense Language Proficiency Test
DLTWG            Defense Language Testing Working Group
DoDD             DoD directive
DoDI             DoD instruction
DoW              Department of War

ECL              English comprehension level
ELPT             English language proficiency test

FLPB             foreign language proficiency bonus
FLPP             foreign language proficiency pay

GS               general schedule

ILR              Interagency Language Roundtable

LR               lower-range

NSA/CSS          National Security Agency/Central Security Service

OPA              Office of People Analytics
OPI              oral proficiency interview
OSW              Office of the Secretary of War

OPI-E            oral proficiency interview-English

UR               upper-range
USW(P&R)         Under Secretary of War for Personnel and Readiness




GLOSSARY                                                                        19
                                                                     DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                     Change 1, February 11, 2026
G.2. DEFINITIONS.

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

 TERM                      DEFINITION

 AFQT                      The score from an individual’s performance on the verbal and
                           mathematics subtests of the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude
                           Battery, specifically word knowledge, paragraph comprehension,
                           arithmetic reasoning, and mathematics knowledge.

 Defense Language          An intra-agency advisory committee described in DoDD 5160.41E.
 Steering Committee

 DLAB                      The preferred DoW standardized test for determining the aptitude of
                           native or near-native speakers of English for learning a foreign
                           language. The DLAB aims to help predict the likely degree of
                           success an individual will have in learning a foreign language.

 DLPT system               The DoW standardized testing system for measuring an individual’s
                           proficiency in a language. It consists of a battery of tests that
                           measures the general ability of a native or near-native speaker to
                           comprehend a spoken and written language and to speak the
                           language. The OPI can test both native and non-native language
                           speakers. DLPT and OPI scores are reported as ILR skill levels in
                           accordance with DoDD 5160.41E and the Federal Government ILR
                           Website.

 DoW SLA                   An individual at the general officer/flag officer, senior executive
                           service, or equivalent level designated in writing by the USW(P&R)
                           pursuant to DoDD 5160.41E.

 ECL test                  A paper-and-pencil or web-delivered test that assesses the English
                           language listening and reading proficiency of international military
                           students being considered for assignment or training in the United
                           States. Service members who are non-native speakers of English will
                           also use the test as a prerequisite qualification for Military Service
                           entry.

 ELPT                      A paper-and-pencil or computer-assisted test that assesses English
                           language skills in listening, reading, and writing against the ILR
                           scale. International personnel who work with or may be assigned to
                           the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Partnership for Peace, or
                           Mediterranean Dialogue countries and international coalitions are the
                           test audience.




GLOSSARY                                                                                          20
                                                                 DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                 Change 1, February 11, 2026
TERM                   DEFINITION

OPI-E                  A test administered in person, by telephone, or by other approved
                       means to measure an individual’s English language proficiency in the
                       speaking and listening modalities across the entire ILR scale.

significant language   At least 150 hours of immersion training, 6 weeks or 5-hours-a-day
training event         classroom training, or another significant event defined by the
                       Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Directors of the
                       Defense Agencies and DoW Field Activities.

SLA                    An individual at the general officer/flag officer, senior executive
                       service, or equivalent level designated in writing by the head of the
                       appropriate DoW Component pursuant to DoDD 5160.41E.




GLOSSARY                                                                                       21
                                                                DoWI 5160.71, June 30, 2022
                                                                Change 1, February 11, 2026

                                              REFERENCES
DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
   (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008, as amended
DoD Directive 5160.41E, “Defense Language, Regional Expertise, and Culture (LREC)
   Program,” August 21, 2015, as amended
DoD Instruction 1340.27, “Military Foreign Language Skill Proficiency Bonuses,” August 17,
   2022
DoD Instruction 1400.25, Volume 2016, “DoD Civilian Personnel Management System:
   Administration of Foreign Language Pay for Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel System
   (DCIPS) Employees,” April 28, 2015
Federal Government Interagency Language Roundtable Website, “Language Skill Level
   Descriptions,” current edition 1
Secretary of War Memorandum, “Department of War Secondary Titles,” October 10, 2025




1 Available at https://www.govtilr.org/Skills/ILRscale1.htm.


REFERENCES                                                                                22
