                           Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                         NUMBER 5525.11
                                                                          March 3, 2005

                                                                                   GC, DoD

SUBJECT: Criminal Jurisdiction Over Civilians Employed By or Accompanying the Armed
         Forces Outside the United States, Certain Service Members, and Former Service
         Members

References: (a) Chapter 212, Sections 3261–3267, of title 18, United States Code
            (b) Chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code
            (c) Report to Accompany H. R. 3380, House of Representatives Report
                106-778, July 20, 2000
            (d) Appendix 3 of title 5, United States Code
            (e) through (am), see enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction:

    1.1. Implements policies and procedures, and assigns responsibilities, under the “Military
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act of 2000,” as amended by Section 1088 of the “Ronald W.
Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005” (reference (a)) (hereinafter
the “Act”) for exercising extraterritorial criminal jurisdiction over certain current and former
members of the U.S. Armed Forces, and over civilians employed by or accompanying the U.S.
Armed Forces outside the United States.

   1.2. Implements Section 3266 of the Act.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

    2.1. This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments (including the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a Service of the Department
of the Navy under agreement with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)), the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Inspector General of the Department
of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”). The
term “Armed Forces,” as used herein, refers to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



Corps, and the Coast Guard; and their respective National Guard and Reserve components. The
term “Military Departments,” as used herein, refers to the Department of the Army, the
Department of the Navy, and the Department of the Air Force.

    2.2. The Coast Guard usually operates as a separate branch of the Armed Forces in the DHS.
However, as stated by Presidential Directive, the Coast Guard operates as a Military Service
within the Department of the Navy and becomes part of the Department of Defense. This
Instruction shall apply to the Coast Guard as permitted by the Act.

     2.3. The Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) (reference (b)) is established in
title 10, U.S.C. (reference (b)), in which jurisdiction and prosecution of crimes is by courts-
martial. The UCMJ offenses are expressly extraterritorial and apply outside the United States.
(See section 805 of reference (b).) In addition to the UCMJ, the U.S. Code (U.S.C.) establishes a
separate body of U.S. criminal laws with jurisdiction and prosecution of crimes in the District
Courts of the United States. As used in this Instruction, all references to “Federal” statutes, laws,
or jurisdiction are to that body of law, unless otherwise indicated.

    2.4. Although some Federal criminal statutes are expressly or implicitly extraterritorial,
many acts described therein are criminal only if they are committed within “the special maritime
and territorial jurisdiction of the United States,” or if they affect interstate or foreign commerce.
Therefore, in most instances, Federal criminal jurisdiction ends at the nation’s borders. State
criminal jurisdiction, likewise, usually ends at the boundaries of each State. Because of these
limitations, acts committed by members of the Armed Forces, former members of the Armed
Forces, and civilians employed by or accompanying the Armed Forces in foreign countries,
which would be crimes if committed in the United States, often do not violate either Federal or
State criminal law. Similarly, civilians are generally not subject to prosecution under the UCMJ,
unless Congress had declared a “time of war” when the acts were committed. As a result, these
acts are crimes, and therefore criminally punishable, only under the law of the foreign country in
which they occurred. However, there have been occasions where the foreign country has elected
not to exercise its criminal jurisdiction and the person goes unpunished for the crimes
committed. (See “Report to Accompany H. R. 3380” (reference (c)), the legislative history of
the Act.) In addition, members of the Armed Forces who are discharged, under normal
circumstances, are no longer subject to the UCMJ (reference (b)) and may not be prosecuted by
courts-martial.

    2.5. The Act and this Instruction are intended to address the jurisdictional gap in U.S. law
regarding criminal sanctions, as applied to civilians employed by or accompanying the Armed
Forces outside the United States, members of the Armed Forces, and former members of the
Armed Forces, including their dependents. It does not enforce a foreign nation’s criminal laws
and, as such, does not require that the person’s actions violate the foreign nation’s laws and
applies even if the conduct may be legal under the foreign nation’s laws. The jurisdictional
requirement is that the conduct be in violation of U.S. Federal laws. When, however, the same
conduct violates the Act and the laws of the foreign nation, the Act provides for consideration of
existing international agreements between the United States and the foreign nation. (See
Sections 3261(b), 3262(a), 3263, and 3264(a) of the Act.) The Act’s jurisdiction regarding an
offense committed outside the United States is not otherwise limited by the geographic location



                                                  2
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



in which it is committed, whether the person was performing duties at the time, whether the
offense is directly or indirectly related to the person’s employment or military duties, or whether
the offense was committed in the foreign country in which the person is assigned or located
while employed by or accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States.

    2.6. Nothing in this Instruction may be construed to deprive a court-martial, military
commission, provost court, or other military tribunal of concurrent jurisdiction regarding
offenders or offenses that by statute or the law of war may be tried by court-martial, military
commission, provost court, or other military tribunal (Section 3261(c) of the Act).

       2.6.1. In some cases, conduct that violates Section 3261(a) of the Act may also violate
the UCMJ (reference (b)), or the law of war generally. Therefore, for members of the Armed
Forces, military authorities have concurrent jurisdiction with a U.S. District Court to try the
offense. The Act was not intended to divest the military of jurisdiction. Consequently, Section
3261(d) of the Act prohibits the prosecution of any member of the Armed Forces under the Act,
while he or she is subject to reference (b), except in the limited circumstances in which a Federal
indictment or information charges that the member of the Armed Forces committed the offense
with one or more other defendants, at least one of whom is not subject to reference (b).

        2.6.2. In such cases involving multiple defendants, the prosecution of the military
accused(s) may be carried out under either the Act or reference (b). The General Court-Martial
Convening Authority over the accused(s) shall determine which venue of prosecution better
serves the overall course of justice after consulting the servicing Staff Judge Advocate who, to
the extent practicable, shall confer with the Domestic Security Section of the Criminal Division,
Department of Justice (DSS/DOJ) and the designated U.S. Attorney’s Office. The limitations
placed on the prosecution of members of the Armed Forces under the Act recognizes that the
military has the predominant interest in disciplining its members and that Section 3261(d) of
reference (a) enacts the general preference that members of the Armed Forces be tried by court-
martial for their crimes. (See “Section-by-Section Analysis” to Section 3261(d) in reference (c).)

    2.7. This Instruction may not be interpreted as superseding the terms and conditions of a pre-
existing Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) agreement between the United States and a foreign
government. (See enclosure 2 for the definition of an SOFA.)


3. POLICY

It is DoD policy that the requirement for order and discipline of the Armed Forces outside the
United States extends to civilians employed by or accompanying the Armed Forces, and that
such persons who engage in conduct constituting criminal offenses shall be held accountable for
their actions, as appropriate. Further guidance is provided at enclosure 3.


4. DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this Instruction are defined in enclosure 2.



                                                 3
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    5.1. The General Counsel of the Department of Defense (GC, DoD) shall provide initial
coordination and liaison with the DOJ and the Department of State (DoS), on behalf of the
Military Departments and the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense,
regarding a case for which Federal criminal prosecution under the Act is contemplated. This
responsibility may be delegated entirely, delegated for categories of cases, or delegated for
individual cases. The General Counsel, or designee, shall advise the DSS/DOJ, as soon as
practicable, when DoD officials intend to recommend that the DOJ consider the prosecution of a
person subject to the Act for offenses committed outside the United States. The Assistant
Attorney General, Criminal Division, DOJ, has designated the DSS/DOJ as the Section
responsible for Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act matters.

   5.2. The Inspector General of the Department of Defense shall:

       5.2.1. Pursuant to Section 4(d) of the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended
(5 U.S.C. App. 3) (reference (d)), “report expeditiously to the Attorney General whenever the
Inspector General has reasonable grounds to believe there has been a violation of Federal
criminal law.” This statutory responsibility is generally satisfied once an official and/or special
agent of the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense notifies either the
cognizant DOJ representative or the Assistant Attorney General (Criminal Division) of the
“reasonable grounds.”

       5.2.2. Pursuant to Section 8(c)(5) of the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended (5
U.S.C. App. 3) (reference (d)) and 10 U.S.C. 141(b) (reference (e)), ensure the responsibilities
described in DoD Directive 5525.7 (reference (f)) to “implement the investigative policies,
monitor compliance by DoD criminal investigative organizations, and provide specific guidance
regarding investigative matters, as appropriate” are satisfied relative to violations of the Military
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act of 2000 (reference (a)).

   5.3. The Heads of the Military Law Enforcement Organizations and the Defense Criminal
Investigative Organizations, or their Designees, shall:

        5.3.1. Advise the applicable Commander of the Combatant Command and Staff Judge
Advocate (or Legal Advisor), or designees, of an investigation of an alleged violation of the Act
that may lead to arrest or criminal prosecution under the Act. Such notice shall be provided as
soon as practicable. In turn, the GC, DoD, or designee, shall be advised to ensure notification of
and consultation with the DOJ and the DoS regarding information about the potential case,
including the host nation’s position regarding the case. At the discretion of the GC, DoD, other
agencies and organizations (such as the Legal Counsel to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and Secretary of the Military Department that sponsored the person into the foreign
country) shall be informed, as appropriate. Effective investigations lead to successful
prosecutions and, therefore, these cases warrant close coordination and cooperation between the
Department of Defense, the DOJ, and the DoS.



                                                  4
                                                                                  DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




         5.3.2. Provide briefings to, and coordinate with, appropriate local law enforcement
authorities in advance, or if not possible, as soon thereafter as is practicable, of investigations or
arrests in specific cases brought under the Act. If not previously provided to local law
enforcement authorities, such briefings about the case shall, at a minimum, describe the Host
Nation’s position regarding the exercise of jurisdiction under the Act that followed from any
briefings conducted pursuant to E3.4. of this Instruction.

      5.4. The Domestic Security Section, Criminal Division, Department of Justice, has agreed
to:

        5.4.1. Provide preliminary liaison with the Department of Defense, coordinate initial
notifications with other Federal entities of the DOJ and Federal law enforcement organizations,
make preliminary decisions regarding proper venue, designate the appropriate U.S. Attorney’s
Office, and coordinate the further assignment of DOJ responsibilities.

        5.4.2. Coordinate with the designated U.S. Attorney’s office to arrange for a Federal
Magistrate Judge to preside over the initial proceedings required by the Act. (See enclosure 2 for
the definition of a Federal Magistrate Judge as used in the Act and in this Instruction.) Although
the assignment of a particular Federal Magistrate Judge shall generally be governed by the
jurisdiction where a prosecution is likely to occur, such an assignment does not determine the
ultimate venue of any prosecution that may be undertaken. Appropriate venue is determined in
accordance with the requirements of 18 U.S.C. 3238 (reference (g)).

       5.4.3. Coordinate the assistance to be provided the Department of Defense with the
designated U.S. Attorney’s office in the district where venue for the case shall presumptively lie;
and

        5.4.4. Serve as the primary point of contact for DoD personnel regarding all
investigations that may lead to criminal prosecutions and all associated pretrial matters, until
such time as the DSS/DOJ advises that the case has become the responsibility of a specific U.S.
Attorney’s Office.

   5.5. The Commanders of the Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, shall:

        5.5.1. Assist the DSS/DOJ on specific cases occurring within the Commander of the
Combatant Command’s area of responsibility that may lead to arrest or criminal prosecution
under the Act. These responsibilities include providing available information and other support
essential to an appropriate and successful prosecution under the Act with the assistance of the
Commanders’ respective Staff Judge Advocates (or Legal Advisors), or their designees, to the
maximum extent allowed and practicable.

        5.5.2. Ensure command representatives are made available, as necessary, to participate in
briefings of appropriate host nation authorities concerning the operation of this Act and the
implementing provisions of this Instruction.



                                                   5
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




        5.5.3. Determine when military necessity in the overseas theater requires a waiver of the
limitations on removal in Section 3264(a) of the Act and when the person arrested or charged
with a violation of the Act shall be moved to the nearest U.S. military installation outside the
United States that is able to adequately detain the person and facilitate the initial proceedings
prescribed in Section 3265(a) of the Act and this Instruction. Among the factors to be
considered are the nature and scope of military operations in the area, the nature of any hostilities
or presence of hostile forces; and the limitations of logistical support, available resources,
appropriate personnel, or the communications infrastructure necessary to comply with the
requirements of Section 3265 of the Act governing initial proceedings.

       5.5.4. Annually report to the GC, DoD, by the last day of February for the immediately
preceding calendar year, all cases involving the arrest of persons for violations of the Act;
persons placed in temporary detention for violations of the Act; the number of requests for
Federal prosecution under the Act, and the decisions made regarding such requests.

        5.5.5. Determine the suitability of the locations and conditions for the temporary
detention of juveniles who commit violations of the Act within the Commander of the
Combatant Command’s area of responsibility. The conditions of such detention must, at a
minimum, meet the following requirements:

            5.5.5.1. Juveniles alleged to be delinquent shall not be detained or confined in any
institution or facility in which the juvenile has regular contact with adult persons convicted of a
crime or awaiting trial on criminal charges;

           5.5.5.2. Insofar as possible, alleged juvenile delinquents shall be kept separate from
adjudicated delinquents; and

            5.5.5.3. Every juvenile in custody shall be provided with adequate food, heat, light,
sanitary facilities, bedding, clothing, recreation, and medical care, including necessary
psychiatric, psychological, or other care and treatment. (See 18 U.S.C. Chapter 403 (reference
(h)).)

       5.5.6. As appropriate, promulgate Instructions to component commands consistent with
and implementing this Instruction. The Commander of the Combatant Command’s duties and
responsibilities pursuant to this Instruction may be delegated.

   5.6. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

       5.6.1. Consistent with the provisions of paragraph 6.3. of this Instruction, provide for
defense counsel representation at initial proceedings conducted outside the United States
pursuant to the Act for those persons arrested or charged with violations of the Act.

       5.6.2. Issue regulations establishing procedures that, to the maximum extent practicable,
provide notice to all persons covered by the Act who are not nationals of the United States but
who are employed by or accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States, with the



                                                 6
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



exception of individuals who are nationals of or resident in the host nation, that they are
potentially subject to the criminal jurisdiction of the United States under the Act.

            5.6.2.1. At a minimum, such regulations shall require that employees and persons
accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States, who are not nationals of the United
States, be informed of the jurisdiction of the Act when they are hired for overseas employment,
or on sponsorship into the overseas command, whichever event is first applicable.

            5.6.2.2. Such notice shall also be provided during employee training and any
briefings provided to these persons when they first arrive in the foreign country in which they
shall be assigned, employed by or accompanying the Armed Forces, or residing as a dependent.

            5.6.2.3. For employees and persons accompanying the Armed Forces outside the
United States who are not nationals of the United States, but who have already been hired or are
present in the overseas command at the time this Instruction becomes effective, such notice shall
be provided within 60 days of the effective date of this Instruction.

        5.6.3. Although the Act’s notice requirement only applies to foreign nationals who may
be subject to prosecution under the Act, the U.S. nationals who are employed by or accompany
the Armed Forces overseas, or who are the dependents of a member of the Armed Forces,
civilian employees, or contractors of the Department of Defense should be made aware of the
Act’s potential jurisdiction. Knowledge of the Act and its potential criminal sanctions serves a
deterrent purpose in helping preserve good order and discipline in military communities outside
the United States. The Military Services regulations should, to the maximum extent practicable,
require information about the Act be provided to all U.S. nationals who are scheduled to be, or
who currently are, employed by or accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States,
including their dependents.

            5.6.3.1. For members of the Armed Forces, civilian employees of the Department of
Defense and civilians accompanying the Armed Forces overseas, notice and briefings on the
applicability of the Act should, at a minimum, be provided to them and their dependents when
travel orders are issued and on their arrival at command military installations or their place of
duty outside the United States.

           5.6.3.2. For civilian employees, contractors (including subcontractor(s) at any tier),
and employees of contractors (including subcontractor(s) at any tier) of any other Federal
Agency, or any provisional authority, permit such persons to attend the above-referenced
briefings on a voluntary basis. In addition, to the maximum extent practicable, make available to
representatives of such other Federal Agencies or provisional authorities such notice and briefing
materials as is provided to civilian employees, contractors, and contractor employees of the
Department of Defense overseas.

       5.6.4. Failure to provide the notice, briefings, or information about the Act pursuant to
subparagraphs 5.6.2. and 5.6.3. of this Instruction shall not create any rights or privileges in the
persons referenced, and shall not operate to defeat the jurisdiction of a court of the United States
or provide a defense or other remedy in any proceeding arising under the Act or this Instruction.



                                                 7
                                                                             DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




        5.6.5. Provide training to personnel who are designated and authorized under the Act and
this Instruction to make arrests outside the United States of persons who allegedly committed a
violation of section 3261(a) of the Act. The training, at a minimum, should include the rights of
individuals subject to arrest.


6. PROCEDURES

   6.1. Applicability

        6.1.1. Offenses and Punishments. Section 3261(a) of the Act establishes a separate
Federal offense under the U.S.C. for any act committed outside the United States that would
constitute a felony-level Federal crime, the same as if such act had been actually committed
within the Special Maritime and Territorial Jurisdiction of the United States, as defined in 18
U.S.C. 7 (reference (i)). Charged as a violation of Section 3261(a) of the Act, the elements of
the offense and maximum punishment are the same as if the crime were committed within the
Special Maritime and Territorial Jurisdiction of the United States, but without the requirement
that the conduct be committed within such geographical limits. (See Section 1 of the “Section-
by-Section Analysis and Discussion” to Section 3261 of the Act in reference (c).)

        6.1.2. Persons Subject to this Instruction. This Instruction applies to certain members of
the Armed Forces, former members of the Armed Forces, and persons employed by or
accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States, and their dependents, as those terms
are defined in enclosure 2 and referenced below, who are alleged to have committed an offense
under the Act while outside the United States. For purposes of the Act and this Instruction,
persons employed by or accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States are subject to
the “military law” of the United States, but only to the extent to which this term has been used
and its meaning and scope have been understood within the context of a SOFA or any other
similar form of international agreement.

        6.1.3. Members of the Armed Forces. Members of the Armed Forces subject to the
Act’s jurisdiction are:

            6.1.3.1. Only those active duty members of the Armed Forces who, by Federal
indictment or information, are charged with committing an offense with one or more defendants,
at least one of whom is not subject to the UCMJ. (See Section 3261(d)(2) of the Act.)

            6.1.3.2. Members of a Reserve component who commit an offense when they are not
on active duty or inactive duty for training (in the case of members of the Army National Guard
or the Air National Guard of the United States, only when in Federal service) are not subject to
UCMJ jurisdiction for that offense and, as such, are amenable to the Act’s jurisdiction
disregarding the limitation of Section 3261(d)(2) of the Act.




                                                8
                                                                              DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




        6.1.4. Former Members of the Armed Forces. Former members of the Armed Forces
subject to the Act’s jurisdiction are:

            6.1.4.1. Former members of the Armed Forces who were subject to the UCMJ at the
time the alleged offense was committed, but are no longer subject to the UCMJ with regarding
that offense because of their release or separation from active duty.

            6.1.4.2. Former members of the Armed Forces, having been released or separated
from active duty, who thereafter allegedly commit an offense overseas while in another
qualifying status (such as while a civilian employed by or accompanying the Armed Forces
outside the United States, the dependent of a civilian employed by or accompanying the Armed
Forces, or the dependent of a person subject to the UCMJ).

        6.1.5. Civilians Employed by the Armed Forces. Persons who are not a national of or
resident in the host nation, who are employed by the U.S. Armed Forces outside the United
States (as defined in enclosure 2), and who commit an offense under the Act while present or
residing outside the United States in connection with such employment, are subject to the Act
and the provisions of this Instruction. Such civilian employees include:

           6.1.5.1. Persons employed by the Department of Defense (including a non-
appropriated fund instrumentality of the Department of Defense).

           6.1.5.2. Persons employed as a DoD contractor (including subcontractor(s) at any
tier).

           6.1.5.3. Employees of a DoD contractor (including subcontractor(s) at any tier).

           6.1.5.4. Civilian employees, contractors (including subcontractor(s) at any tier), and
civilian employees of a contractor (or subcontractor(s) at any tier) of any other Federal Agency,
or any provisional authority, to the extent such employment relates to supporting the mission of
the Department of Defense overseas.

       6.1.6. Civilians Accompanying the Armed Forces. Subject to the requirements of
subparagraph 6.1.6.2., the following persons are civilians accompanying the Armed Forces
outside the United States who are covered by the Act and the provisions of this Instruction:

           6.1.6.1. Dependents of:

               6.1.6.1.1. Active duty members of the Armed Forces.

                6.1.6.1.2. Members of the Reserve component while the Service member was on
active duty or inactive duty for training, but in the case of members of the Army National Guard
or the Air National Guard of the United States, only when in Federal service.




                                                9
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



             6.1.6.1.3. Former members of the Armed Forces who are employed by or are
accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States.

               6.1.6.1.4. Civilian employees of the Department of Defense (including non-
appropriated fund instrumentalities of the Department of Defense).

               6.1.6.1.5. DoD contractors (including subcontractor(s) at any tier).

               6.1.6.1.6. Employees of a DoD contractor (including subcontractor(s) at any tier).

          6.1.6.2. In addition to the person being the dependent of a person who is listed in
subparagraph 6.1.6.1., jurisdiction under the Act requires that the dependent also:

               6.1.6.2.1. Reside with one of the persons listed in subparagraph 6.1.6.1.

               6.1.6.2.2. Allegedly commit the offense while outside the United States; and

              6.1.6.2.3. Not be a national of, or ordinarily resident in, the host nation where the
offense is committed.

            6.1.6.3. Command sponsorship of the dependent is not required for the Act and this
Instruction to apply.

           6.1.6.4. When the dependent is a juvenile, as defined in enclosure 2, who engaged in
conduct that is subject to prosecution under Section 3261(a) of the Act, the provisions of
reference (h), and any limitations or requirements therein, would apply to U.S. District Court
prosecutions.

       6.1.7. Persons NOT Subject to the Act or the Procedures of this Instruction

            6.1.7.1. Persons who are the nationals of, or resident in, the host nation where the
offense is committed, regardless of their employment or dependent status.

           6.1.7.2. Persons who have recognized dual citizenship with the United States and
who are the nationals of, or resident in, the host nation where the offense is committed are not
persons “accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States” within the meaning of the
Act and this Instruction.

           6.1.7.3. Persons, including citizens of the United States who, at the time the offense
was committed outside the United States, were not members of the Armed Forces, civilian
employees of the Armed Forces outside the United States, or civilians accompanying the Armed
Forces outside the United States, as those terms are defined in the Act, as modified, and in
enclosure 2.




                                                10
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




                6.1.7.3.1. Persons (including members of a Reserve component) whose presence
outside the United States at the time the offense is committed, is solely that of a tourist, a
student, or a civilian employee or civilian accompanying some other non-Federal Agency,
organization, business, or entity (and thereby may not be said to be employed by or
accompanying the Armed Forces within the definitions of those terms as established by the Act,
as modified) are not subject to the Act. Civilian employees of an agency, organization, business,
or entity accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States may, by virtue of the
agency, organization, business, or entity relationship with the Armed Forces, be subject to the
Act and this Instruction.

                 6.1.7.3.2. Persons who are subject to the Act and this Instruction remain so while
present, on official business or otherwise (e.g., performing temporary duty or while in leave
status), in a foreign country other than the foreign country to which the person is regularly
assigned, employed, or accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States.

           6.1.7.4. Juveniles whose ages are below the minimum ages authorized for the
prosecution of juveniles in U.S. District Court under the provisions of reference (h).

            6.1.7.5. Persons subject to the UCMJ (see Sections 802 and 803 of reference (b)) are
not subject to prosecution under the Act unless, pursuant to Section 3261(d) of the Act, the
member ceases to be subject to reference (b) or an indictment or information charges that the
member committed the offense with one or more other defendants, at least one of whom is not
subject to reference (b). Retired members of a regular component who are entitled to pay remain
subject to reference (b) after retiring from active duty. (See Section 802 of reference (b).) A
member of the Reserve component who commits a UCMJ offense while serving on active duty
or inactive duty training is subject to the UCMJ and is not, by virtue of the termination of a
period of active duty or inactive-duty training, relieved from amenability to UCMJ jurisdiction
for that offense. (See Section 803 of reference (b).) Such retired members of a regular
component and members of the Reserve components are not subject to prosecution under the Act
unless Section 3261(d)(2) of the Act applies. In addition, other provisions of Sections 802 and
803 of reference (b) should be considered to determine whether the person should be arrested or
charged with a violation of Section 3261 of the Act.

        6.1.8. The U.S. Coast Guard. Whether persons are subject to the Act as members of the
Armed Forces, former members of the Armed Forces, civilians employed by or accompanying
the Armed Forces outside the United States, and their dependents, depends on if at the time of
the offense the Coast Guard was operating as a separate Service in the DHS or a Service in the
Department of the Navy.

          6.1.8.1. When operating as a separate Service in the DHS, only active duty Coast
Guard members assigned outside the United States and their accompanying dependents are those
who are subject to the Act’s jurisdiction.




                                                11
                                                                                 DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




           6.1.8.2. When the Coast Guard is operating as a Service in the Department of the
Navy, civilians employed by or accompanying the Coast Guard (to include contractors and
subcontractor(s) at any tier), and their dependents, as well as Coast Guard members and their
dependents, are also subject to the Act’s jurisdiction.

       6.1.9. Persons Having a Tenuous Nexus to the United States. Third Country Nationals
who are not a resident in the host nation, and who meet the definition of “a person accompanying
the Armed Forces outside the United States,” may have a nexus to the United States that is so
tenuous that it places into question whether the Act’s jurisdiction should be applied and whether
such persons should be subject to arrest, detention, and prosecution by U.S. authorities.
Depending on the facts and circumstances involved, and the relationship or connection of the
foreign national with the U.S. Armed Forces, it may be advisable to consult first with the
DSS/DOJ before taking action with a view toward prosecution. In addition, to facilitate
consultation with the government of the nation of which the Third Country National is a citizen,
the DoS should be notified of any potential investigation or arrest of a Third Country National.

   6.2. Investigation, Arrest, Detention, and Delivery of Persons to Host Nation Authorities

        6.2.1. Investigation. Investigations of conduct reasonably believed to constitute a
violation of the Act committed outside the United States must respect the sovereignty of the
foreign nation in which the investigation is conducted. Such investigations shall be conducted in
accordance with recognized practices with host nation authorities and applicable international
law, SOFA, and other international agreements. After general coordination with appropriate host
nation authorities, as referenced in enclosure 3 of this Instruction, specific investigations shall, to
the extent practicable, be coordinated with appropriate local law enforcement authorities, unless
not required by agreement with host nation authorities.

       6.2.2. Initial Coordination with the DOJ

            6.2.2.1. When a Military Criminal Investigative Organization is the lead investigative
organization, the criminal investigator, in order to assist the DSS/DOJ and the designated U.S.
Attorney representative (once the DSS/DOJ has made the designation), in making a preliminary
determination of whether the case warrants prosecution under the Act, shall provide a copy of the
Investigative Report, or a summary thereof, to the Office of the Staff Judge Advocate of the
Designated Commanding Officer (DCO) (as defined in enclosure 2) at the location where the
offense was committed for review and transmittal, through the Commander of the Combatant
Command, to the DSS/DOJ and the designated U.S. Attorney representative. The Office of the
Staff Judge Advocate shall also furnish the DSS/DOJ and the designated U.S. Attorney
representative an affidavit or declaration from the criminal investigator or other appropriate law
enforcement official that sets forth the probable cause basis for believing that a violation of the
Act has occurred and that the person identified in the affidavit or declaration has committed the
violation.




                                                  12
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




            6.2.2.2. When the Defense Criminal Investigative Service (DCIS) is the lead
investigative organization, the criminal investigator, for assisting the DSS/DOJ and the
designated U.S. Attorney representative in making a preliminary determination of whether the
case warrants prosecution under the Act, shall provide a copy of the Investigative Report, or a
summary thereof, to the DSS/DOJ and the designated U.S. Attorney representative, as
appropriate. The criminal investigator shall also furnish the DSS/DOJ and the designated
U.S. Attorney representative an affidavit or declaration that sets forth the probable cause basis
for believing that a violation of the Act has occurred and that the person identified in the
affidavit or declaration has committed the violation. Within the parameters of reference (d), the
DoD Inspector General may also notify the GC, DoD, and the DCO’s Office of the Staff Judge
Advocate at the location where the offense was committed, as appropriate.

            6.2.2.3. Residence Information. Determination of the individual’s “last known
residence” in the United States is important in determining which Federal district would be
responsible for any possible future criminal proceedings. An individual’s last known residence
in the United States shall be determined from an individual’s personnel records, travel orders
into the overseas theater, passport, or other records, or by questioning upon arrest or detention, as
part of the routine “booking” information obtained. See Pennsylvania v. Muniz and United
States v. D’Anjou (references (j) and (k)). The available information shall be promptly
forwarded to the DSS/DOJ, who, in coordination with the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys,
DOJ, shall designate which U.S. Attorney’s Office shall be consulted regarding possible
prosecution of the case. The information is necessary to assist in determining which law
enforcement authorities and providers of pretrial services, including those who issue probation
reports, shall ultimately have responsibility for any case that may develop.

                6.2.2.3.1. Due to the venue provisions of reference (g), the DSS/DOJ and the
designated U.S. Attorney representative, as appropriate, shall be consulted prior to removal of
persons arrested or charged with a violation of the Act by U.S. law enforcement officials. The
venue for Federal criminal jurisdiction over offenses committed on the high seas or elsewhere
beyond the jurisdiction of a particular State or District (as would be required under the Act), is in
the Federal district in which the offender is arrested or first brought. However, if the individual
is not so arrested in or brought into any Federal district in the United States (i.e., is to be
indicted), or information is obtained, prior to his or her return to the United States, then an
indictment or information may be in the district of the person’s last known residence. If no such
residence is known, the indictment or information may be filed in the District of Columbia.

                6.2.2.3.2. “Last known residence” refers to that U.S. location where the person
lived or resided. It is not necessarily the same as a person’s legal domicile or home of record.
“Known” means known to the Government. It has been held that the Government acts
reasonably in determining the last known residence for purposes of reference (g), when it relies
on prior statements of the expatriate to the Government such as in passport applications. (See
United States v. Minns (reference (l)).)




                                                 13
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




               6.2.2.3.3. Prompt transmittal of venue information to the DSS/DOJ and the
designated U.S. Attorney representative in the United States may prove helpful in determining
whether a particular case may be prosecuted, and ultimately a pivotal factor in determining
whether the host nation or the United States shall exercise its jurisdiction over the matter.

              6.2.2.3.4. The Investigative Report, and any affidavit or declaration, as well as all
other documents associated with a case, shall be transmitted promptly by the command Staff
Judge Advocate to the DSS/DOJ and the designated U.S. Attorney representative. This may be
accomplished through the use of facsimile or other means of electronic communication.

        6.2.3. Notice of Complaint or Indictment. Upon receipt of information from command
authorities or the Defense Criminal Investigation Organizations that a person subject to the Act’s
jurisdiction has committed an offense in violation of Section 3261(a) of the Act, the U.S.
Attorney for the District in which there would be venue for a prosecution may, if satisfied that
probable cause exists to believe that a crime has been committed and that the person identified
has committed this crime, file a complaint under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 3
(reference (m)). As an alternative, the U.S. Attorney may seek the indictment of the person
identified. In either case, a copy of the complaint or indictment shall be provided to the Office of
the Staff Judge Advocate of the overseas command that reported the offense. The DSS/DOJ and
the designated U.S. Attorney representative shall be the sources from which the command’s Staff
Judge Advocate, and the Staff Judge Advocate of the appropriate Combatant Command, are able
obtain a copy of any complaint or indictment. Transmission of copies of these documents may
be accomplished through the use of facsimile or other means of electronic communication.

       6.2.4. Arrest.

            6.2.4.1. Rule 4 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure (reference (m)) takes the
jurisdiction of the Act into consideration in stating where arrest warrants may be executed:
“Location. A warrant may be executed, or a summons served, within the jurisdiction of the
United States or anywhere else a Federal statute authorizes an arrest.” The Advisory Committee
Note (reference (m)) explains that the new language reflects the enactment of the Military
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act (reference (a)) permitting arrests of certain military and DoD
personnel overseas.

           6.2.4.2. The Act specifically authorizes persons in DoD law enforcement positions,
as designated by the Secretary of Defense, to make arrests outside the United States, on probable
cause and in accordance with recognized practices with host nation authorities and applicable
international agreements, those persons subject to the Act who violate Section 3261(a) of the
Act. Section 3262(a) of the Act constitutes authorization by law to conduct such functions
pursuant to reference (b) and therefore avoids any argument or contention that the restrictions of
the Posse Comitatus Act (reference (n)) may possibly apply extraterritorially regarding members
of the Armed Forces providing support to civilian law enforcement agencies.




                                                14
                                                                                 DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



             6.2.4.3. Unless not required by agreement with host nation authorities, as referenced
in this Instruction, arrests in specific cases shall, to the extent practicable, be first coordinated
with appropriate host nation law enforcement authorities.

            6.2.4.4. Military and civilian special agents assigned to the DCIOs (the DCIS, the
Army’s Criminal Investigation Command, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, and the Air
Force Office of Special Investigations) are authorized to make an arrest, outside the United
States, of a person who has committed an offense under Section 3261(a) of the Act. Civilian
special agents assigned to DCIOs while performing duties outside the United States shall make
arrests consistent with the standardized guidelines established for such agents, as approved in
accordance with 10 U.S.C. 1585a, 4027, 7480, and 9027 (references (o), (p), (q), and (r)).

            6.2.4.5. Members of the Armed Forces and DoD civilian employees (including local
nationals, either direct hire or indirect hire) assigned to security forces, military police, shore
patrol, or provost offices at military installations and other facilities located outside the United
States are also authorized to make an arrest, outside the United States, of a person who has
committed an offense under Section 3261(a) of the Act. This authority includes similar members
of the Coast Guard law enforcement community, but only when the Coast Guard is operating at
such locations as a Service in the Department of the Navy.

            6.2.4.6. Law enforcement personnel designated and authorized by the Secretary of
Defense in this Instruction may arrest a person, outside the United States, who is suspected of
committing a felony offense in violation of Section 3261(a) of the Act, when the arrest is based
on probable cause to believe that such person violated Section 3261(a) of the Act, and when
made in accordance with applicable international agreements. Because the locations of the
offense and offender are outside the United States, it is not usually expected that the arrest would
be based on a previously-issued Federal arrest warrant. While Federal arrest warrants and
indictments are not required as predicates to arrests under the Act, when circumstances permit it
is preferable to file a criminal complaint with supporting affidavits or obtain a grand jury
indictment prior to arresting the person for a violation of the Act. Law enforcement personnel
authorized to make arrests shall follow the Secretaries of the Military Departments’ and
appropriate DoD guidelines for making arrests without a warrant, as prescribed by references (o),
(p), (q), and (r). Authorizations issued by military magistrates under the UCMJ may not be used
as a substitute for Federal arrest warrant requirements. The foregoing authorization to DoD law
enforcement personnel to arrest persons subject to 18 U.S.C. Chapter 212 (reference (a)) for
violations of the Act is not intended as a limitation on the authority of other Federal law
enforcement officers to effect arrests when authorized to do so. (See 18 U.S.C. 3052 (reference
(s)) authorizing agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to make arrests “for any felony
cognizable under the laws of the United States,” 21 U.S.C. 878(a)(3) (reference (t)) for the same
authority for Drug Enforcement Administration agents, and 18 U.S.C. 3053 (reference (u)) for
the same authority for U.S. Marshals and their deputies.)




                                                 15
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




       6.2.5. Temporary Detention.

           6.2.5.1. The Commander of a Combatant Command, or designee, may order the
temporary detention of a person, within the Commander of the Combatant Command’s area of
responsibility outside the United States, who is arrested or charged with a violation of the Act.
The Commander of the Combatant Command, or designee, may determine that a person arrested
need not be held in custody pending the commencement of the initial proceedings required by
Section 3265 of the Act and paragraph 6.4. of this Instruction. The Commander of the
Combatant Command may designate those Component or DCO Commanders who are also
authorized to order the temporary detention of a person, within the commanding officer’s area of
responsibility outside the United States, who is arrested or charged with a violation of the Act.

            6.2.5.2. A person arrested may be temporarily detained in military detention facilities
for a reasonable period, in accordance with regulations of the Military Departments and subject
to the following:

                6.2.5.2.1. Temporary detention should be ordered only when a serious risk is
believed to exist that the person shall flee and not appear, as required, for any pretrial
investigation, pretrial hearing, or trial proceedings, or the person may engage in serious criminal
misconduct (e.g., the intimidation of witnesses or other obstructions of justice, causing injury to
others, or committing other offenses that pose a threat to the safety of the community or to the
national security of the United States). The decision as to whether temporary detention is
appropriate shall be made on a case-by-case basis. Section 3142 of 18 U.S.C. (reference (v))
provides additional guidance regarding conditions on release and factors to be considered.

              6.2.5.2.2. A person arrested or charged with a violation of the Act who is to be
detained temporarily shall, to the extent practicable, be detained in areas that separate him or her
from sentenced military prisoners and members of the Armed Forces who are in pretrial
confinement pending trial by courts-martial.

               6.2.5.2.3. Separate temporary detention areas shall be used for male and female
detainees.

                6.2.5.2.4. Generally, juveniles should not be ordered into temporary detention.
However, if circumstances warrant temporary detention, the conditions of such temporary
detention must comply with the requirements of subparagraph 5.5.5. of this Instruction.
Appointment of a guardian ad litem may be required under Section 5034 of reference (h) to
represent the interests of the juvenile when the juvenile’s parents are not present or when the
parents’ interests may be adverse to that of the juvenile.

           6.2.5.3. Persons arrested or charged with a violation of the Act, on being ordered into
temporary detention and processed into the detention facility, shall, as part of the processing
procedures, be required to provide the location address of their last U.S. residence as part of the
routine booking questions securing “biographical data necessary to complete booking or pretrial
services.” (See reference (k).) This information shall be recorded in the detention documents



                                                 16
                                                                                 DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



and made available to the DCO’s Office of the Staff Judge Advocate. This information shall be
forwarded with other case file information, including affidavits in support of probable cause
supporting the arrest and temporary detention, to the DSS/DOJ. The information is provided so
that the DSS/DOJ may make appropriate preliminary decisions about venue. (See “Residence
Information,” subparagraph 6.2.2.3.)

               6.2.5.3.1. Notice of the temporary detention of any person for a violation of the
Act shall be forwarded without unnecessary delay to the Commander of the Combatant
Command. The Commander of the Combatant Command shall advise the GC, DoD, as the
representative of the Secretary of Defense, of all such detentions. At the discretion of the GC,
DoD, other agencies and organizations (such as the Legal Counsel to the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of the Military Department that sponsored the person into the
foreign country) shall be informed, as appropriate.

               6.2.5.3.2. Such notice shall include a summary of the charges, facts and
circumstances surrounding the offenses, information regarding any applicable SOFA or other
international agreements affecting jurisdiction in the case, and the reasons warranting temporary
detention.

             6.2.5.4. If military command authorities at the military installation outside the United
States intend to request a person’s detention by order of the Federal Magistrate Judge, the
military representative assigned to the case shall gather the necessary information setting forth
the reasons in support of a motion to be brought by the attorney representing the Government at
the initial proceeding conducted pursuant to Section 3265 of the Act.

            6.2.5.5. This Instruction is not intended to eliminate or reduce existing obligations or
authorities to detain persons in foreign countries as required or permitted by agreements with
host countries. (See generally, United States v. Murphy (reference (w)).)

       6.2.6. Custody and Transport of Persons While in Temporary Detention.

             6.2.6.1. The Department of Defense may only take custody of and transport the
person as specifically set forth in the Act. This is limited to delivery as soon as practicable to the
custody of U.S. civilian law enforcement authorities for removal to the United States for judicial
proceedings; delivery to appropriate authorities of the foreign country in which the person is
alleged to have committed the violation of Section 3261(a) of the Act in accordance with Section
3263; or, on a determination by the Secretary of Defense, or designee, that military necessity
requires it, removal to the nearest U.S. military installation outside the United States adequate to
temporarily detain the person and to facilitate the initial appearance described in Section 3265(a)
of the Act.

            6.2.6.2. Responsibility for a temporarily detained person’s local transportation,
escort, and custody requirements remains with the command that placed the person in temporary
detention for a violation of Section 3261(a) of the Act. This responsibility includes:




                                                 17
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



              6.2.6.2.1. Attendance at official proceedings and other required health and
welfare appointments (e.g., appointments with counsel, medical and dental appointments, etc.)

               6.2.6.2.2. Delivery to host nation officials under Section 3263 of the Act.

               6.2.6.2.3. Attendance at Initial Proceedings conducted under Section 3265 of the
Act.

               6.2.6.2.4. Delivery to the custody of U.S. civilian law enforcement authorities for
removal to the United States.

            6.2.6.3. A person who requires the continued exercise of custody and transportation
to appointments and locations away from the detention facility, including delivery of the person
to host nation officials under Section 3263 of the Act, may be transferred under the custody of
those law enforcement officers authorized to make arrests in subparagraph 6.2.4. of this
Instruction. Transportation of a detainee outside an installation shall be coordinated with the
host nation’s local law enforcement, as appropriate and in accordance with recognized practices.

            6.2.6.4. Military authorities retain responsibility for the custody and transportation of
a person arrested or charged with a violation of the Act who is to be removed from one military
installation outside the United States to another military installation outside the United States,
including when the person is transferred under the provisions of Section 3264(b)(5) of the Act.
Unless otherwise agreed between the sending and receiving commands, it shall be the
responsibility of the sending command to make arrangements for the person’s transportation and
custody during the transport or transfer to the receiving command.

             6.2.6.5. In coordination with appropriate host nation authorities, as referenced in
section E3.4. of this Instruction, and after complying with any case-specific provisions that may
apply pursuant to subparagraphs 5.2.2., 6.2.8.1.1., and 6.5.1.2., and unless a Federal Magistrate
Judge orders the person’s release from temporary detention on conditions, U.S. civilian law
enforcement authorities shall be responsible for taking custody of a person arrested or charged
with a violation of the Act and for the removal of that person to the United States for any pretrial
or trial proceedings. The DoD officials shall consult with the DSS/DOJ to determine which
civilian law enforcement authority (i.e., U.S. Marshals Service, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
Drug Enforcement Agency, or other Federal Agency) shall dispatch an officer to the overseas’
detention facility to assume custody of the person for removal to the United States. Until
custody of the person is delivered to such U.S. civilian law enforcement authorities, military
authorities retain responsibility for the custody and transportation of the person arrested or
charged with a violation of the Act, to include transportation within the host nation to help
facilitate the removal of the person to the United States under the Act.

        6.2.7. Release from Temporary Detention. When a person subject to the Act has been
placed in temporary detention, in the absence of a Criminal Complaint or Indictment pursuant to
reference (m), only the Commander who initially ordered detention, a superior Commander, or a
Federal Magistrate Judge may order the release of the detained person. If a Criminal Complaint
or Indictment pursuant to reference (m) exists, or if a Federal Magistrate Judge orders the



                                                 18
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



detention of a person subject to the Act, a Federal Magistrate Judge may order the release of the
detained person. If a Federal Magistrate Judge orders the detained person to be released from
detention, the Commander who ordered detention, or a superior Commander, shall cause the
person to be released. When a person is released from detention under this provision, the
Commander shall implement, to the extent of the Commander’s authority, any conditions on
liberty directed in a Federal Magistrate Judge’s order. When the Commander who independently
ordered the person’s temporary detention without reliance on a Federal Magistrate Judge’s order,
or a superior Commander, orders a person’s release before a Federal Magistrate Judge is
assigned to review the matter, the Commander may, within his or her authority, place reasonable
conditions upon the person’s release from detention.

            6.2.7.1. A person’s failure to obey the conditions placed on his or her release from
detention, in addition to subjecting that person to the Commander’s or a Federal Magistrate
Judge’s order to be returned to detention, may, consistent with the Commander’s authority and
applicable policy, laws, and regulations, subject the person to possible criminal sanctions, or to
administrative procedures leading to a loss of command sponsorship to the foreign country, as
well as the possibility of additional disciplinary or adverse action.

           6.2.7.2. A copy of all orders issued by a Federal Magistrate Judge concerning initial
proceedings, detention, conditions on liberty, and removal to the United States shall promptly be
provided to the Commander of the Combatant Command concerned and the Commander of the
detention facility at which the person is being held in temporary detention.

       6.2.8. Delivery of Persons to Host Nation Authorities

           6.2.8.1. Persons arrested may be delivered to the appropriate authorities of the
foreign country in which the person is alleged to have violated Section 3261(a) of the Act, when:

                6.2.8.1.1. Authorities of a foreign country request that the person be delivered for
trial because the conduct is also a violation of that foreign country’s laws, and

               6.2.8.1.2. Delivery of the person is authorized or required by treaty or another
international agreement to which the United States is a party.

            6.2.8.2. The Coast Guard personnel authorized to make arrests pursuant to
subparagraph 6.2.4.5.of this Instruction are also authorized to deliver persons to foreign country
authorities, as provided in Section 3263 of the Act.

           6.2.8.3. Section 3263(b) of the Act calls on the Secretary of Defense, in consultation
with the Secretary of State, to determine which officials of a foreign country constitute
appropriate authorities to which persons subject to the Act may be delivered. For purposes of the
Act, those authorities are the same foreign country law enforcement authorities as are
customarily involved in matters involving foreign criminal jurisdiction under an applicable
SOFA or other international agreement or arrangement between the United States and the foreign
country.




                                                19
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



            6.2.8.4. No action may be taken under this Instruction with a view toward the
prosecution of a person for a violation of the Act if a foreign government, in accordance with
jurisdiction recognized by the United States, has prosecuted or is prosecuting such person for the
conduct constituting such offense(s), except on the approval of the Attorney General or the
Deputy Attorney General (or a person acting in either such capacity). (See Section 3261(b) of
the Act.) Requests for an exception shall be written and forwarded to the Combatant
Commander. The Combatant Commander shall forward the request to the GC, DoD, as
representative for the Secretary of Defense, for review and transmittal to the Attorney General of
the United States. At the discretion of the GC, DoD, other agencies and organizations (such as
the Legal Counsel to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of the Military
Department that sponsored the person into the foreign country), shall be informed, as
appropriate.

            6.2.8.5. Except for persons to be delivered to a foreign country, and subject to the
limitations of Section 3264 of the Act and paragraph 6.5. of this Instruction, persons arrested for
conduct in violation of the Act shall, on the issuance of a removal order by a Federal Magistrate
Judge under Section 3264(b) of the Act, be delivered, as soon as practicable, to the custody of
U.S. civilian law enforcement authorities. (See subparagraph 6.2.6.4.)

   6.3. Representation

       6.3.1. Civilian Defense Counsel

         6.3.1.1. Civilian defense counsel representation shall not be at the expense of the
Department of Defense or the Military Departments.

            6.3.1.2. The Act contemplates that a person arrested or charged with a violation of
the Act shall be represented by a civilian attorney licensed to practice law in the United States.
However, it is also recognized that in several host nations where there has been a long-standing
military presence, qualified civilian attorneys (including lawyers who are U.S. citizens) have
established law practices to assist assigned U.S. personnel and to represent members of the
Armed Forces in courts-martial, or before host nation courts. With the consent of the person
arrested or charged with a violation of the Act who wishes to remain in the foreign country, these
lawyers may provide adequate representation for the limited purpose of any initial proceedings
required by the Act. When the person is entitled to an attorney or requests counsel, staff judge
advocates at such locations should assemble a list of local civilian attorneys for the person’s
consideration. The list shall contain a disclaimer stating that no endorsement by the U.S.
Government or the command is expressed or implied by the presence of the attorney’s name on
the list.

               6.3.1.2.1. To the extent practicable, military authorities shall establish procedures
by which persons arrested or charged with a violation of the Act may seek the assistance of
civilian defense counsel by telephone. Consultation with such civilian counsel shall be private
and protected by the attorney-client privilege.




                                                20
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



                6.3.1.2.2. Civilian defense counsel, at no expense to the Department of Defense,
shall be afforded the opportunity to participate personally in any initial proceedings required by
the Act that are conducted outside the United States. When civilian defense counsel may not
reasonably arrange to be personally present for such representation, alternative arrangements
shall be made for counsel’s participation by telephone or by such other means that enables voice
communication among the participants.

                6.3.1.2.3. When at least one participant may not arrange to meet at the location
outside the United States where initial proceedings under the Act are to be conducted,
arrangements should be made whenever possible to conduct the proceedings by video
teleconference or similar means. Command video teleconference communication systems
should be used for this purpose, if resources permit, and if such systems are not otherwise
unavailable due to military mission requirements. When these capabilities are not reasonably
available, the initial proceedings required by the Act shall be conducted by telephone or such
other means that enables voice communication among the participants. (See Section 3265 of the
Act.)

               6.3.1.2.4. The above provisions regarding the use of teleconference
communication systems apply to any detention proceedings that are conducted outside the
United States pursuant to Section 3265(b) of the Act.

               6.3.1.2.5. Civilian defense counsel practicing in host nations does not gain DoD
sponsorship, or any diplomatic status, as a result of their role as defense counsel. To the extent
practicable, notice to this effect shall be provided to the civilian defense counsel when the
civilian defense counsel’s identity is made known to appropriate military authorities.

       6.3.2. Qualified Military Counsel

            6.3.2.1. Counsel representation also includes qualified military counsel, as defined in
enclosure 2, which the Judge Advocate General of the Military Department concerned
determines is reasonably available for the purpose of providing limited representation at initial
proceedings required by the Act and conducted outside the United States. By agreement with the
DHS, the Coast Guard Commands and Activities located outside the United States shall establish
local agreements for qualified military counsel of the Military Departments to provide similar
limited representation in Coast Guard related cases. The Secretaries of the Military Departments
shall establish regulations governing representation by qualified military counsel. At a
minimum, these regulations shall require that the Command’s Staff Judge Advocate:

           6.3.2.2. Prepare, update as necessary, and make available to a Federal Magistrate
Judge on request, a list of qualified military counsel who are determined to be available for the
purpose of providing limited representation at initial proceedings required by the Act.

           6.3.2.3. Ensure that the person arrested or charged under the Act is informed that any
qualified military counsel shall be made available only for the limited objective of representing
that person in any initial proceedings required by the Act that are to be conducted outside the
United States, and that such representation does not extend to further legal proceedings that may



                                                21
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



occur either in a foreign country or the United States The person arrested or charged shall also
be required written acknowledgement of the limited scope of qualified military counsel’s
representation, and therein waive that military counsel’s further representation in any subsequent
legal proceedings conducted within a foreign country or the United States. The
“Acknowledgement of Limited Representation,” at enclosure 4, may be used for this purpose. A
copy of the “Acknowledgement of Limited Representation” shall be provided to the person
arrested or charged under the Act, as well as to the qualified military counsel. The original
acknowledgment shall be kept on file in the DCO’s Office of the Staff Judge Advocate.

            6.3.2.4. Provide available information that would assist the Federal Magistrate Judge
make a determination that qualified civilian counsel are unavailable, and that the person arrested
or charged under the Act is unable financially to retain civilian defense counsel, before a
qualified military counsel who has been made available is assigned to provide limited
representation. (See “Report to Accompany H. R. 3380,” the legislative history of the Act,
(reference (c)).)

       6.3.3. Union Representation. Agency law enforcement officials shall comply with
applicable Federal civilian employee rights and entitlements, if any, regarding collective
bargaining unit representation under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 (reference (x)), during pretrial
questioning and temporary detention procedures under this Instruction.

        6.3.4. Military Representative. To assist law enforcement officers and the U.S.
Attorney’s representative assigned to a case, a judge advocate, legal officer, or civilian attorney-
advisor may be appointed as a military representative to represent the interests of the United
States. As appropriate, the military representative may be appointed as a Special Assistant U.S.
Attorney. The military representative shall be responsible for assisting the command, law
enforcement, and U.S. Attorney representatives during pretrial matters, initial proceedings, and
other procedures required by the Act and this Instruction. These responsibilities include assisting
the U.S. Attorney representative to determine whether continued detention is warranted, and to
provide information to the presiding Federal Magistrate Judge considering the following:

           6.3.4.1. If there is probable cause to believe that a violation of the Act has been
committed and that the person arrested or charged has committed it, and

            6.3.4.2. Whether the person detained temporarily should be kept in detention or
released from detention, and, if released, whether any conditions practicable and reasonable
under the circumstances, should be imposed.

    6.4. Initial Proceedings

         6.4.1. A person arrested for or charged with a violation of the Act may be entitled to an
initial appearance before a judge and/or a detention hearing (collectively, the “initial
proceedings”). The initial proceedings are intended to meet the requirements of the Federal
Rules of Criminal Procedure (reference (m)). The initial proceedings are not required when the
person under investigation for violating the Act has not been arrested or temporarily detained by
U.S. military authorities, or the person’s arrest or temporary detention by U.S. law enforcement



                                                 22
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



authorities occurs after the person ceases to be employed by or accompany the Armed Forces
outside the United States, or the arrest or detention takes place within the United States.

        6.4.2. The initial proceedings to be conducted pursuant to the Act and this Instruction
shall not be initiated for a person delivered to foreign country authorities and against whom the
foreign country has prosecuted or is prosecuting the person for the conduct constituting such
offense. In these circumstances, it is only when the Attorney General or Deputy Attorney
General (or a person acting in either such capacity) approves an exception allowing for a
prosecution in U.S. District Court that initial proceedings may be conducted under the Act. A
request that an exception be approved shall be forwarded through the Combatant Commander to
the GC, DoD, in accordance with subparagraph 6.2.8.4. of this Instruction.

        6.4.3. Initial proceedings required by the Act and this Instruction shall be conducted,
without unnecessary delay. In accordance with the U.S. Supreme Court decision in County of
Riverside v. McLaughlin (reference (y)) the initial appearance shall be conducted within 48 hours
of the arrest. The initial proceedings required by the Act shall be conducted when:

           6.4.3.1. The person arrested has not been delivered to foreign country authorities
under the provisions of Section 3263 of the Act; or

           6.4.3.2. The foreign country authorities having custody of the person deliver the
person to U.S. military authorities without first prosecuting the person for such conduct as an
offense under the laws of that foreign country.

        6.4.4. A Federal Magistrate Judge shall preside over the initial proceedings that are
required by the Act and this Instruction. The proceedings should be conducted from the United
States using video teleconference methods, if practicable, and with all parties to the proceedings
participating. In the event that there is no video teleconference capability, or the video
teleconference capability is unavailable due to military requirements or operations, the parties to
the proceeding shall, at a minimum, be placed in contact by telephone.

       6.4.5. Initial proceedings conducted pursuant to the Act and this Instruction shall include
the requirement for the person’s initial appearance under reference (m). The Federal Magistrate
Judge shall determine whether probable cause exists to believe that an offense under Section
3261(a) of the Act has been committed and that the identified person committed it. This
determination is intended to meet the due process requirements to which the person is entitled, as
determined by the U.S. Supreme Court in Gerstein v. Pugh (reference (z)).

       6.4.6. Initial proceedings shall also include a detention hearing when required under 18
U.S.C. 3142 (references (aa) and (m)). A detention hearing may be required when:

          6.4.6.1. The person arrested or charged with a violation of the Act has been placed in
temporary detention and the intent is to request continued detention; or

            6.4.6.2. The United States seeks to detain a person arrested or charged with a
violation of the Act who has not previously been detained.



                                                23
                                                                                   DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




        6.4.7. A detention hearing shall be conducted by a Federal Magistrate Judge. When the
person arrested or charged requests the detention hearing be conducted while the person remains
outside the United States, the detention hearing shall be conducted by the same Federal
Magistrate Judge presiding over the initial proceeding and shall be conducted by telephone or
other means that allow for voice communication among the participants, including the person’s
defense counsel. If the person does not so request, or if the Federal Magistrate Judge so orders,
the detention hearing shall be held in the United States after the removal of the person to the
United States

         6.4.8. In the event that the Federal Magistrate Judge orders the person’s release prior to
trial, and further directs the person’s presence in the district in which the trial is to take place, the
U.S. Attorney’s Office representative responsible for prosecuting the case shall inform the
military representative and the DCO’s Office of the Staff Judge Advocate.

         6.4.9. Under circumstances where the person suspected of committing an offense in
violation of the Act has never been detained or an initial proceeding conducted, the presumption
is that a trial date shall be established at which the defendant would be ordered to appear. Such
an order would constitute an order under Section 3264(b)(4) of the Act that “otherwise orders the
person to be removed.” The person’s failure to appear as ordered shall be addressed by the
Court, as with any other failure to comply with a valid court order.

        6.4.10. The DCO’s Office of the Staff Judge Advocate shall assist in arranging for the
conduct of initial proceedings required by the Act and this Instruction, and shall provide a
military representative to assist the U.S. Attorney’s Office representative in presenting the
information for the Federal Magistrate Judge’s review. The military representative shall also
provide any administrative assistance the Federal Magistrate Judge requires at the location
outside the United States where the initial proceedings are to be conducted.

    6.5. Removal of Persons to the United States or Other Countries

        6.5.1. In accordance with the limitation established by Section 3264 of the Act, military
authorities shall not remove, to the United States or any other foreign country, a person
suspected of violating Section 3261(a) of the Act, except when:

           6.5.1.1. The person’s removal is to another foreign country in which the person is
believed to have committed a violation of Section 3261(a) of the Act; or

           6.5.1.2. The person is to be delivered, on request, to authorities of a foreign country
under Section 3263 of the Act and subparagraph 6.2.8., or

            6.5.1.3. The person is arrested or charged with a violation of the Act and is entitled
to, and does not waive, a preliminary examination under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 5.1
(reference (m)), in which case the person shall be removed to the United States for such
examination; or




                                                   24
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



           6.5.1.4. The person’s removal is ordered by a Federal Magistrate Judge (see
paragraph 6.5.2. of this Instruction); or

           6.5.1.5. The Secretary of Defense, or designee, directs the person be removed, as
provided in Section 3264(b)(5) of the Act and subparagraph 6.5.3. of this Instruction.

      6.5.2. Removal by Order of a Federal Magistrate Judge. The Military authorities may
remove a person suspected of violating Section 3261(a) of the Act to the United States when:

            6.5.2.1. A Federal Magistrate Judge orders that the person be removed to the United
States to be present at a detention hearing; or

           6.5.2.2. A Federal Magistrate Judge orders the detention of the person prior to trial
(see Section 3142(e) of reference (aa), in which case the person shall be promptly removed to the
United States for such detention); or

           6.5.2.3. A Federal Magistrate Judge otherwise orders the person be removed to the
United States.

        6.5.3. Removal by Direction of the Secretary of Defense or Designee. The Secretary of
Defense, or designee, may order a person’s removal from a foreign country within the
Combatant Command’s geographic area of responsibility when, in his sole discretion, such
removal is required by military necessity. (See Section 3264(b)(5) of the Act.) Removal based
on military necessity may be authorized to take into account any limiting factors that may result
from military operations, as well as the capabilities and conditions associated with a specific
location.

             6.5.3.1. When the Secretary of Defense, or designee, determines that a person
arrested or charged with a violation of the Act should be removed from a foreign country, the
person shall be removed to the nearest U.S. military installation outside the United States where
the limiting conditions requiring such a removal no longer apply, and where there are available
facilities and adequate resources to temporarily detain the person and conduct the initial
proceedings required by the Act and this Instruction.

           6.5.3.2. The relocation of a person under this subparagraph does not authorize the
further removal of the person to the United States, unless further removal is authorized by an
order issued by a Federal Magistrate Judge under subparagraph 6.5.2.

             6.5.3.3. Delegation. The Commander of a Combatant Command, and the
Commander’s principal assistant, are delegated authority to make the determination, based on the
criteria stated in subparagraph 6.5.3., that a person arrested or charged with a violation of the Act
shall be removed from a foreign country under Section 3264(b)(5) of the Act and this Instruction.
Further delegation is authorized, but the delegation of authority is limited to a subordinate
Commander within the command who is designated as a general court-martial convening
authority under reference (b).




                                                 25
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



        6.5.4. A person who is removed to the United States under the provisions of the Act and
this Instruction and who is thereafter released from detention, and otherwise at liberty to return to
the location outside the United States from which he or she was removed, shall be subject to any
requirements imposed by a Federal District Court of competent jurisdiction.

        6.5.5. Where a person has been removed to the United States for a detention hearing or
other judicial proceeding and a Federal Magistrate Judge orders the person’s release and permits
the person to return to the overseas location, the Department of Defense (including the Military
Department originally sponsoring the person to be employed or to accompany the Armed Forces
outside the United States) shall not be responsible for the expenses associated with the return of
the person to the overseas location, or the person’s subsequent return travel to the United States
for further court proceedings that may be required.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

    7.1. This Instruction, including its enclosures, is intended exclusively for the guidance of
members of the Armed Forces and civilian employees of the Department of Defense and the
U.S. Coast Guard by agreement with the DHS. Nothing contained herein creates or extends any
right, privilege, or benefit to any person or entity. (See United States v. Caceres (reference
(ab)).)

   7.2. This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures – 4
   E1. References, continued
   E2. Definitions
   E3. Further Guidelines
   E4. Acknowledgment of Limited Legal Representation (Sample)




                                                 26
                                    E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                 REFERENCES, continued


(e)  Section 141(b) of title 10, United States Code
(f)  DoD Directive 5525.7, “Implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding
     between the Department of Justice and the Department of Defense Relating to the
     Investigation and Prosecution of Certain Crimes,” January 22, 1985
(g) Section 3238 of title 18, United States Code
(h) Chapter 403 of title 18, United States Code
(i) Section 7 of title 18, United States Code
(j) Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 U.S. 582, at 601 (1990)
(k) United States v. D’Anjou, 16 F. 3d 604 (4th Cir.1993)
(l) United States v. Minns, 917 F. Supp. 488 (1994)
(m) Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure of title 18, United States Code
(n) Section 1385 of title 18, United States Code
(o) Section 1585a of title 10, United States Code
(p) Section 4027 of title 10, United States Code
(q) Section 7480 of title 10, United States Code
(r) Section 9027 of title 10, United States Code
(s) Section 3052 of title 18, United States Code
(t) Section 878(a)(3) of title 21, United States Code
(u) Section 3053 of title 18, United States Code
(v) Section 3142 of title 18, United States Code
(w) United States v. Murphy, 18 M. J. 220 (CMA 1984)
(x) Chapter 71 of title 5, United States Code
(y) County of Riverside v. McLaughlin, 500 U.S. 44 (1991)
(z) Gerstein v. Pugh, 420 U.S. 103 (1975)
(aa) Chapter 207 of title 18, United States Code
(ab) United States v. Caceres, 440 U.S. 741 (1979)
(ac) Section 101(d)(1) of title 10, United States Code
(ad) Section 101(a)(4) of title 10, United States Code
(ae) DoD Directive 5525.1, “Status of Forces Policies and Information,” August 7, 1979
(af) Section 3261(a) of title 18, United States Code
(ag) Chapter 13 of title 21, United States Code
(ah) Section 206 of title 37, United States Code
(ai) Section 101(d)(7) of title 10, United States Code
(aj) Section 101(a)(8) of title 10, United States Code
(ak) Section 1101(a)(22) of title 8, United States Code
(al) Manual for Courts-Martial, United States (2002 Edition)
(am) Section 5 of title 18, United States Code




                                             27                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



                                       E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                                         DEFINITIONS


   E2.1.1. Accompanying the Armed Forces Outside the United States. As defined in Section
3267 of the Act, the dependent of:

       E2.1.1.1 A member of the Armed Forces; or

      E2.1.1.2. A civilian employee of the Department of Defense (including a
nonappropriated fund instrumentality of the Department of Defense); or

       E2.1.1.3. A DoD contractor (including subcontractor(s) at any tier); or

       E2.1.1.4. An employee of a DoD contractor (including subcontractor(s) at any tier); and

       E2.1.1.5. A person residing with such member, civilian employee, contractor, or
contractor employee outside the United States; and

       E2.1.1.6. A person not a national of or ordinarily resident in the host nation.

    E2.1.2. Active Duty. Full-time duty in the active Military Service of the United States.
Such term includes full-time training duty, annual training duty, and attendance, while in the
active service, at a school designated as a Military Service school by law or by the Secretary of
the Military Department concerned. Such term does not include full-time National Guard duty.
(See 10 U.S.C. 101(d)(1) (reference (ac)).)

   E2.1.3. Armed Forces. The Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, and the
Coast Guard, and their respective National Guard and Reserve components. (See 10 U.S.C.
101(a)(4) (reference (ad)).)

   E2.1.4. Arrest. To be taken into physical custody by law enforcement officials.

    E2.1.5. Charged. As used in the Act and this Instruction, this term is defined as an
indictment or the filing of information against a person under reference (i). (See analysis to
Section 3264 of reference (c), the legislative history of the Act.)

    E2.1.6. Civilian Component. A person or persons “employed by the Armed Forces outside
the United States” as defined in subparagraph E2.1.11. and Section 3267(a)(1) as amended, of
the Act. A term used in SOFAs.




                                                28                                     ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




    E2.1.7. Defense Criminal Investigative Organizations (DCIOs). The DCIS, the Army’s
Criminal Investigation Command, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, and the Air Force
Office of Special Investigations. References to defense criminal investigators refer to military
and civilian special agents assigned to the DCIOs. When the DCIS is not included in the
reference to criminal investigative organizations, the other organizations are collectively referred
to as the Military Criminal Investigative Organizations.

    E2.1.8. Dependent. As used in the Act, a person for whom a member of the Armed Forces,
civilian employee, contractor (or subcontractor(s) at any tier) has legal responsibility while that
person is residing outside the United States with or accompanying that member of the Armed
Forces, civilian employee, contractor (or subcontractor(s) at any tier), and while that responsible
person is a member of the Armed Forces, or employed by or obligated to perform a contractual
obligation to the Department of Defense. For purposes of this Instruction, a person’s “command
sponsorship” status while outside the United States is not to be considered, except that there shall
be a rebuttal presumption that a command-sponsored individual is a dependent. By agreement
with the DHS, this definition includes those persons for whom a member of the United States
Coast Guard has similar responsibility while that person is residing outside the United States
with or accompanying that Coast Guard member.

    E2.1.9. Designated Commanding Officer (DCO). A single military commander in each
foreign country where U.S. Armed Forces are stationed, as contemplated by DoD Directive
5525.1 (reference (ae)).

   E2.1.10. Detention. To be taken into custody by law enforcement officials and placed under
physical restraint.

      E2.1.11. District. A District Court of the United States.

      E2.1.12. Employed by the Armed Forces Outside the United States. Any person employed
as:

       E2.1.12.1. A civilian employee of the Department of Defense (including a non-
appropriated fund instrumentality of the Department of Defense); or

         E2.1.12.2. A DoD contractor (including subcontractor(s) at any tier); or

         E2.1.12.3. An employee of a DoD contractor (including subcontractor(s) at any tier);

         E2.1.12.4. A civilian employee, contractor (including a subcontractor(s) at any tier), and
a civilian employee of a contractor (or subcontractor(s) at any tier) of any other Federal Agency,
or any provisional authority, to the extent such employment relates to supporting the mission of
the Department of Defense overseas; and, when the person:

         E2.1.12.4.1. Is present or resides outside the United States in connection with such
employment; and



                                                  29                                   ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




           E2.1.12.4.2. Is not a national of or ordinarily resident in the host nation.

    E2.1.13. Federal Magistrate Judge. As used in the Act and this Instruction, this term
includes both Judges of the United States and U.S. Magistrate Judges, titles that, in general,
should be given their respective meanings found in reference (m). (See footnote 32 of reference
(c).) The term does not include Military Magistrates or Military Judges, as prescribed by
reference (b), or regulations of the Military Departments or the Department of Defense.

     E2.1.14. Felony Offense. Conduct that is an offense punishable by imprisonment for more
than 1 year. See 18 U.S.C. 3261(a) (reference (af)). Although the Act uses the conditional
phrase “if committed within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States,”
acts that would be a Federal crime regardless of where they are committed in the United States,
such as drug crimes contained in 21 U.S.C. Chapter 13 (reference (ag)), also fall within the scope
of Section 3261(a) of the Act. (See reference (i) and the analysis to Section 3261 of reference
(c), the legislative history of the Act.)

     E2.1.15. Host Country National. A person who is not a citizen of the United States, but who
is a citizen of the foreign country in which that person is located.

    E2.1.16. Inactive Duty Training. Duty prescribed for Reservists by the Secretary of the
Military Department concerned under 37 U.S.C. 206 (reference (ah)), or any other provision of
law; and special additional duties authorized for Reservists by an authority designated by the
Secretary of the Military Department concerned and performed by Reservists on a voluntary
basis in connection with the prescribed training or maintenance activities of the units to which
they are assigned. Inactive Duty Training includes those duties performed by Reservists in their
status as members of the National Guard while in Federal service. (See 10 U.S.C. 101(d)(7)
(reference (ai)).)

    E2.1.17. Juvenile. A person who has not attained his or her eighteenth birthday, as defined
in reference (h).

   E2.1.18. Military Departments. The Department of the Army, the Department of the Navy,
and the Department of the Air Force. (See 10 U.S.C. 101(a)(8) (reference (aj)).)

   E2.1.19. National of the United States. As defined in 8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(22) (reference (ak)).

    E2.1.20. Outside the United States Those places that are not within the definition of “United
States” in subparagraph E2.1.25., and, with the exception of subparagraph 7(9) of reference (i),
those geographical areas and locations that are not within the Special Maritime and Territorial
Jurisdiction of the United States, as defined in reference (i). The locations defined in
subparagraph 7(9) of reference (i) are to be considered “Outside the United States” for the
purposes of this Instruction. (See reference (a).)




                                                 30                                     ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                                  DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




    E2.1.21. Qualified Military Counsel. A Judge Advocate who is a graduate of an accredited
law school or is a member of the bar of a Federal court or of the highest court of a State and who
the Judge Advocate General of the Armed Force of which he or she is a member certifies as
competent to perform such duties under the Act.

    E2.1.22. Staff Judge Advocate. A judge advocate so designated in the Army, the Air Force,
or the Marine Corps; or the principal legal advisor of a command in the Navy and the Coast
Guard who is a judge advocate, regardless of job title. (See Rule for Courts-Martial 103(17),
Manual for Courts-Martial, United States (2002 Edition) (reference (al)).)

    E2.1.23. Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA). SOFAs are bilateral international agreements
between a sending State (SS) and a receiving State (RS), which define the legal status of SS
personnel and property in the territory of the RS. The purpose of such an agreement is to set
forth rights and responsibilities between the SS and the host government on such matters as
criminal and civil jurisdiction over SS personnel, the wearing of uniforms and the carrying of
arms by SS personnel, tax and customs relief for the SS, entry and exit of SS personnel and
property, and resolution of damage claims.

    E2.1.24. Third Country National. A person whose citizenship is that of a country other than
the United States and the foreign country in which the person is located.

    E2.1.25. United States. As defined in 18 U.S.C. 5 (reference (am)), this term, as used in a
territorial sense, includes all places and waters, continental or insular, subject to the jurisdiction
of the United States, except for the Panama Canal Zone.




                                                  31                                      ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                                DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



                                       E3. ENCLOSURE 3

                                PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES


    E3.1.1. Civilians employed by the Armed Forces outside the United States who commit
felony offenses while outside the United States are subject to U.S. Federal criminal jurisdiction
under the Act, and should be held accountable for their actions, as appropriate.

    E3.1.2. Civilians accompanying the Armed Forces outside the United States who commit
felony offenses while outside the United States are subject to U.S. Federal criminal jurisdiction
under the Act, and shall be held accountable for their actions, as appropriate.

    E3.1.3. Former members of the Armed Forces who committed felony offenses while serving
as a member of the Armed Forces outside the United States, but who ceased to be subject to the
UCMJ court-martial jurisdiction under 10 U.S.C. 802 and 803 (reference (b)) without having
been tried by court-martial for such offenses, are subject to U.S. Federal criminal jurisdiction
under the Act and should be held accountable for their actions, as appropriate.

    E3.1.4. The procedures of this Instruction and DoD actions to implement the Act shall
comply with applicable international law, SOFA, and other international agreements affecting
relationships and activities between the respective host nation countries and the U.S. Armed
Forces. These procedures may be employed outside the United States only if the foreign country
concerned has been briefed or is otherwise aware of the Act and has not interposed an objection
to the application of these procedures. Such awareness may come in various forms, including
but not limited to SOFAs containing relevant language, Diplomatic Notes or other
acknowledgements of briefings, or case-by-case arrangements, agreements, or understandings
with appropriate host nation officials.

    E3.1.5. Consistent with the long-standing policy of maximizing U.S. jurisdiction over its
citizens, the Act and this Instruction provide a mechanism for furthering this objective by closing
a jurisdictional gap in U.S. law and thereby permitting the criminal prosecution of covered
persons for offenses committed outside the United States. In so doing, the Act and this
Instruction provide, in appropriate cases, an alternative to a host nation’s exercise of its criminal
jurisdiction should the conduct that violates U.S. law also violate a host nation’s law, as well as a
means of prosecuting covered persons for crimes committed in areas in which there is no
effective host nation criminal justice system.

    E3.1.6. In addition to the limitations imposed upon prosecutions by Section 3261(b) of the
Act, the Act and the procedures of this Instruction should be reserved generally for serious
misconduct for which administrative or disciplinary remedies are determined to be inadequate or
inappropriate. Because of the practical constraints and limitations on the resources available to
bring these cases to successful prosecution in the United States, initiation of action under this
Instruction would not generally be warranted unless serious misconduct were involved.




                                                 32                                     ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                             DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005



    E3.7. The procedures set out in the Act and this Instruction do not apply to cases in which
the return of fugitive offenders is sought through extradition and similar proceedings, nor are
extradition procedures applicable to cases under the Act.




                                               33                                    ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                               DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




                                       E4. ENCLOSURE 4

       ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF LIMITED LEGAL REPRESENTATION (SAMPLE)



1. I, _____________________________________________, have been named as a suspect or
defendant in a matter to which I have been advised is subject to the jurisdiction of the Military
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act of 2000 (Section 3261, et. seq., of title 18, United States Code);
hereinafter referred to as “the Act.” I have also been informed that certain initial proceedings
under 18 U.S.C. § 3265 may be required under this Act, for which I am entitled to be represented
by legal counsel.

2. I acknowledge and understand that the appointment of military counsel for the limited
purpose of legal representation in proceedings conducted pursuant to the Act is dependent upon
my being unable to retain civilian defense counsel representation for such proceedings, due to
my indigent status, and that qualified military defense counsel has been made available.

3. Pursuant to the Act, ___________________________________, a Federal Magistrate Judge,
has issued the attached Order and has directed that military counsel be made available:

____ For the limited purpose of representing me at an initial proceeding to be conducted outside
the United States pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3265.

____ For the limited purpose of representing me in an initial detention hearing to be conducted
outside the United States pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3265(b).

4. ______________________________, military counsel, has been made available in
accordance with DoD Instruction 5525.11 and as directed by the attached Order of a Federal
Magistrate Judge.

5. I (do) (do not) wish to be represented by _________________________, military counsel
________ (initials).

6. I understand that the legal representation of _______________________, military counsel, is
limited to:

a. Representation at the initial proceedings conducted outside the United States pursuant to 18
U.S.C. § 3265. ________ (Initials)




                                                34                                     ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                            DoDI 5525.11, March 3, 2005




       ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF LIMITED LEGAL REPRESENTATION, continued



b. The initial detention hearing to be conducted outside the United States pursuant to the
Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act of 2000 (18 U.S.C. § 3261, et. seq.). _______________
(Initials)



________________________________________

Signature of Person To Be Represented By Military Counsel


________________________________________

Signature of Witness*

Attachment:
Federal Magistrate Judge Order


(*Note: The witness must be a person other than the defense counsel to be made available for
this limited legal representation.)




                                              35                                    ENCLOSURE 4
