                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 3000.04
                                                                             September 24, 2009
                                                         Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018

                                                                                       USD(A&S)

SUBJECT: DoD Munitions Requirements Process (MRP)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

   a. Reissues DoD Instruction 3000.4 (Reference (a)) under the authority of DoD Directive
5134.01 (Reference (b)), to establish policy, assign responsibilities, and prescribe procedures for
generating, developing, and disseminating DoD MRP products pursuant to the Secretary of
Defense Memorandums (References (c) and (d)).

   b. Establishes a total munitions requirement (TMR).

    c. Establishes the DoD MRP Steering Committee (SC) and Working Group (WG) to ensure
the appropriate data is generated and collected to support the MRP.

    d. Leverages DoD Analytic Agenda products as the starting points for developing near-year
(NY) and out-year (OY) munitions requirements pursuant to DoD Directive 8260.05 and DoD
Instruction 8260.2 (References (e) and (f)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”). The term “Military Services,” as used herein, refers to the Army, the
Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.

   b. Specifically applies to those DoD Components and, through the Heads of those DoD
Components, to their subordinate field organizations involved in munitions requirements
development, subsequent procurement, and inventory management.
                                                             DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009




3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary and the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms
(Reference (g)).


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

    a. Establish a TMR for the U.S. Armed Forces, consistent with guidance from References
(b), (c), and Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
(USD(AT&L)) Memorandum (Reference (h)) that enables the execution of their assigned
military missions.

    b. Ensure that munitions requirements developed as a result of the MRP are visible,
accessible, and understandable to the rest of the Department (except where limited by law,
policy, or security classification).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3. An MRP implementation timeline is provided in
Enclosure 4.


7. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The reporting requirements in this Instruction are
exempt from licensing in accordance with Paragraphs 1.b.(9) of Volume 9 of DoD Manual
8910.01 (Reference (i)).


8. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            2
                                                             DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


9. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (j)).


10. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective September 24, 2009.




                                                Ashton B. Carter
                                                Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
                                                Technology, and Logistics

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   4. DoD MRP Implementation Timeline
   5. DoD MRP Steering Committee and Working Group Organizations
   Glossary




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           3
                                                                         DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


                                                ENCLOSURE 1

                                                REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Instruction 3000.4, “DoD Munitions Requirements Process (DoD MRP),”
      October 23, 2003 (hereby canceled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
      Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(c)   Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Guidance for the Development of the Force (GDF)
      Fiscal Years 2010-2015,” May 12, 2008
(d)   Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Guidance for the Employment of the Force (GEF)
      2008-2010,” May 12, 2008
(e)   DoD Directive 8260.05, “Support for Strategic Analysis (SSA),” July, 7, 2011
(f)   DoD Instruction 8260.2, “Implementation of Data Collection, Development, and
      Management for Strategic Analyses,” January 21, 2003
(g)   Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
      Associated Terms,” as amended
(h)   Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Memorandum,
      “DoD MRP Implementation Guidance Memorandum,” February 20, 2009 1
(i)   DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
      DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014
(j)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
      Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
      of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018




1
  This document is classified and not releasable to the public. Individuals may request access to this document from
the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, & Logistics, through the Heads of their
OSD Components.


Change 2, 08/31/2018                                     4                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L) shall:

   a. Oversee compliance with this Instruction.

    b. Convene, as needed, and chair a flag officer and/or Senior Executive Service MRP SC to
manage MRP activities. Representatives of the MRP SC are listed in Enclosure 5 of this
Instruction.

    c. Leverage the existing DoD Analytic Agenda products to assist in the timely development
of the TMRs.

    d. Develop and distribute a DoD MRP Implementation Guidance memorandum, in
coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)) and the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, by October 1 of every even-numbered calendar year.

   e. Convene a DoD MRP conference every even-numbered calendar year (before the start of
each MRP cycle) or as needed. The conference shall be used to review anticipated changes in
DoD guidance and procedures that will affect the MRP and/or to resolve any MRP issues that
may have been encountered in the previous cycle.

   f. Initiate an off-year MRP as needed.

   g. Collect and distribute to MRP participants, as appropriate, phased threat distributions
(PTDs) and TMRs.


2. USD(P). The USD(P) shall identify both current-year and future-year scenarios, as well as
forward presence and current operational demands for use in the MRP, in coordination with the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Heads of the DoD Components no later than
September 1 of every even-numbered calendar year, or as needed.


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW
INTENSITY CONFLICT (ASD(SO/LIC)). The ASD(SO/LIC), under the authority, direction,
and control of the USD(P), shall:

   a. Perform and assist the USD(P) in executing the responsibilities in section 2 of this
enclosure, for the execution of special operations (SO) and low-intensity conflict.

    b. Review SO forces munitions requirements, programs, and budget. Provide any changes
to the USD(AT&L), by November 15 of every odd-numbered calendar year.


Change 2, 08/31/2018                            5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009




4. DIRECTOR, COST ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAM EVALUATION (CAPE). The
Director, CAPE shall:

   a. Ensure all relevant munitions issues identified and validated in the Munitions
Assessments are reflected in the joint programming guidance.

    b. Review Military Services’ program objective memorandum (POM) munitions programs
to ensure they:

       (1) Comply with References (c), (d), and (h).

       (2) Are consistent with the DoD MRP process.

       (3) Provide program balance among munitions, force structure, and modernization
programs.

   c. Identify and document program review issues.

   d. Assist the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in utilizing DoD Analytic Agenda
products as the starting point for developing OY PTDs (i.e., as part of the scenarios, concept of
operations, and integrated data developed in accordance with Reference (e)).

   e. Ensure that MRP products, data, and templates, including PTDs and Service TMRs, are
available as appropriate in the DoD Analytic Agenda’s joint data warehouse consistent with
Reference (e). Appropriate data and templates will be maintained on CAPE’s Joint Data Support
Web Site on the Secret Internet Protocol Router Network at https://jds.pae.osd.smil.mil.


5. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). The Director, DIA, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I), shall provide to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, the USD(AT&L), and the Director, CAPE, a Threat Report detailing the threat layout
for the NY and OY based on plans and scenarios identified in Reference (h). These DIA
assessments shall be the authoritative threat estimate for developing munitions requirements.


6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

   a. Review all products of the MRP, either through formal meetings or formal staffing.

   b. Ensure that the Military Services shall:




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


       (1) Work directly with the Combatant Commanders and the DoD Components to
develop NY and OY munitions requirements, pursuant to References (c), (d), and (h), using the
submitted PTDs.

       (2) Account for United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) needs in their
munitions requirements submissions (include non-SO-unique munitions in the TMR submission
and detail any related programmatic action).

       (3) Develop one set of NY munitions requirements using “unconstrained” inventories
and an additional set of NY munitions requirements using “constrained” inventories.

        (4) Develop a set of OY munitions requirements using “unconstrained” inventories that
identify the optimal mix of munitions to address the OY PTDs.

       (5) Provide, by November 1 on odd-numbered years, NY and OY-unconstrained
munitions requirements to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the USD(AT&L), and the
Director, CAPE.

       (6) Provide, by January 1 on even-numbered years, NY-constrained munitions
requirements to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the USD(AT&L), and the Director,
CAPE.

       (7) Provide revised total munitions inventory projections to the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the USD(AT&L) 21 days after the POM is submitted.

    c. Use the OY munitions requirements as input to POM munitions investments; in doing so
balance the TMR, projected inventory, and affordability.

    d. Conduct a two-phase (pre-POM and post-POM) Sufficiency Assessment that identifies
the Military Services’ capability to address the threat assigned in the PTDs.


7. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:

   a. Review all products of the MRP, either through formal meetings or formal staffing.

   b. In coordination with the USD(P)and other DoD Component Heads, develop policy
guidance for the MRP pursuant to References (c) and (d).

   c. Coordinate with USD(P), Secretaries of the Military Departments, and Combatant
Commanders in defining current operations and forward presence requirements for USSOCOM
and each Military Service.

  d. Distribute the NY and OY munitions requirements to the appropriate Combatant
Commands, the USD(AT&L), and other appropriate DoD MRP participants.


Change 2, 08/31/2018                           7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009



   e. Review and approve, as appropriate, NY PTDs for inclusion in the Current Year Analytic
Baselines consistent with Reference (e).

    f. Collaborate with appropriate Combatant Commanders and Chiefs of the Military Services
to develop OY PTDs.

   g. Conduct a two-phase OY Munitions Assessment in coordination with the appropriate
Combatant Commander(s) that assesses risk to warfighting success due to any differences
between computed requirements and the programmed OY munitions inventories.

    h. Provide Joint Requirements Oversight Council (JROC)-validated OY PTDs and TMRs to
the Director, CAPE for use in the DoD Analytic Agenda, consistent with Reference (e).


8. COMMANDERS OF COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the Combatant
Commands shall:

   a. Review all products of the MRP that affect their area of responsibility, either through
formal meetings or formal staffing.

    b. In accordance with References (c), (d), and (h), generate and submit to the USD(AT&L),
through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, an NY PTD that allocates threats to each
Military Service and allied force (where coalition allies are expected) in order to complete their
assigned military mission.

    c. Conduct an NY pre-POM Munitions Assessment in coordination with the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff that assesses risk to warfighting success based on the NY-constrained
TMRs.


9. COMMANDER, USSOCOM (CDRUSSOCOM). The CDRUSSOCOM shall:

   a. Refer to References (c), (d), and (h) for guidance in developing USSOCOM munitions
procurement requirements.

  b. Utilize DoD Analytic Agenda products as the starting point for developing the
USSOCOM-specific TMR.

    c. Provide munitions data to the USD(AT&L) and ASD(SO/LIC), through the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for submission and review, by November 1 of every odd-numbered
calendar year.

    d. Incorporate threats, if apportioned by the MSFDs into scenarios for modeling (as part of
the Joint Mission Analysis Process), to determine munitions requirements for the Objective
Force.


Change 2, 08/31/2018                             8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                            DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009



    e. Provide USSOCOM Component Commands non-Major Force Program – 11, Service
common munitions requirements, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Chiefs
of the corresponding Military Services for programmatic action and inclusion in the Military
Service TMRs.

    f Balance the TMR, projected inventory, and affordability associated with USSOCOM’s
mission area. If another source is committed to some level of support, that support must be
factored into procurement objectives.

  g. Conduct two (pre-POM and post-POM) Sufficiency Assessments that identify
USSOCOM’s capability to execute major combat operations.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           9                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. IMPLEMENTATION GUIDANCE

    a. The USD(P), with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall provide coordinated
guidance, including at a minimum the scenarios and major assumptions to be used in the MRP,
to USD(AT&L) no later than September 1 of every even-numbered calendar year, or as needed,
to ensure the timely release of the Implementation Guidance memorandum.

   b. The USD(AT&L) shall develop and distribute a DoD MRP Implementation Guidance
memorandum by October 1 of every even-numbered calendar year. The guidance shall include
any procedural changes, special interest areas, reporting requirements, and special instructions.


2. THREAT REPORT. The Director, DIA shall deliver to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, the USD(AT&L), and the Director, CAPE validated threat assessments based on Reference
(h). The assessments shall be provided no later than January 1 of every odd-numbered calendar
year to allow for the timely development of PTDs. Provide estimates of target reconstitution and
regeneration rates as well as battle-damage assessment factors with the assessments.


3. PTDS

    a. The Combatant Commands shall generate an NY PTD based on the Reference (h)-cited
operational plan (OPLAN) and/or contingency plan (CONPLAN). The development of NY
PTDs is based on theater-specific assumptions that allow each warfighting Combatant Command
to assess Service component target allocations and risk mitigation.

       (1) NY PTDs shall be coordinated with DoD Components through the Current Year
Analytic Baseline process. NY PTDs shall address all required threats, whether serviced by the
Combatant Commands or a supporting Combatant Command.

        (2) Submit NY PTDs no later than March 1 of every odd-numbered calendar year to the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the USD(AT&L), and the Director, CAPE. Ensure that
threats allocated to United States Strategic Command are noted as such in the Combatant
Command PTD results.

        (3) Combatant Commands will specify assumptions and allocation methodology
associated with NY PTD development. The PTDs may include risk mitigation in determining
threat allocations. An explanation and justification for each area of risk mitigation will be
provided and shall specify the change in target quantities (within a category or target type). Risk
mitigation factors are meant to ensure OPLAN success if major OPLAN assumptions prove
unfavorable.


Change 2, 08/31/2018                            10                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009



   b. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall collaborate with appropriate Combatant
Commanders and Chiefs of the Military Services to develop OY PTDs utilizing DoD Analytic
Agenda products as the starting point.

        (1) OY PTDs will be based on mid-term defense planning scenarios (DPS) and multi
service force deployments (MSFD), but may leverage appropriate Combatant Command NY
PTDs for specific guidance when DPS and MSFD information is insufficient.

        (2) OY PTDs shall consider risk mitigation (e.g., degraded use of air assets). The
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall provide an explanation and justification for each area
of risk mitigation and shall specify the change in target quantities (within a category or target
type).

        (3) The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall submit the OY PTDs to USD(AT&L)
no later than May 1 of every odd-numbered calendar year for review and action by the
Combatant Commanders, the Chiefs of the Military Services, Director, CAPE, and the
USD(AT&L).


4. TMR

    a. The TMR is comprised of the War Reserve Munitions Requirement (WRMR) and the
Training and Testing Requirement. The WRMR is comprised of the Combat Requirement,
Strategic Readiness Requirement, and the Current Operations/Forward Presence Requirement.

   b. The MRP will produce several TMRs:

      (1) The NY-unconstrained TMR provides insight to near-term funding issues entering
the POM process and potential Service reprogramming prior to the Future Years Defense
Program (FYDP) in question.

        (2) The NY-constrained TMR provides a means to assess risk to an OPLAN or
CONPLAN, assists in the prioritization of munitions pre-positioning and allocation issues, and
gives insight to initial funding issues entering the POM process.

       (3) The OY-unconstrained TMR represents the Military Services’ and USSOCOM’s
munitions inventory objective at the end of the FYDP and informs the POM submissions.

       (4) The OY-constrained TMR will be addressed via the Sufficiency and Munitions
Assessments based on the differences between the OY-unconstrained requirement and the latest
Military Service and USSOCOM inventory projections.


5. SUFFICIENCY ASSESSMENTS



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            11                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


   a. The Military Services and USSOCOM shall deliver pre-POM Sufficiency Assessments by
January 1 of every even-numbered calendar year to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
USD(AT&L), and the Director, CAPE; post-POM assessments shall be submitted 21 days after
POM submission to OSD.

  b. Sufficiency Assessments shall be used to inform programmers and DoD leaders during
POM deliberations.

    c. Military Services may collaborate with appropriate Combatant Commands and the Joint
Staff in developing the pre-POM and post-POM Sufficiency Assessments.


6. MUNITIONS ASSESSMENTS

    a. The appropriate Combatant Commands shall conduct a pre-POM Munitions Assessment
in coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that analyzes overall warfighting
success based on the NY-constrained TMRs.

    b. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall conduct a two-phase Munitions
Assessment on the OY TMRs, coordinating with the appropriate Combatant Commands. The
Services’ pre-POM and post-POM Sufficiency Assessments shall be used to assist the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Munitions Assessments.

    c. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and appropriate Combatant Commands shall
present the pre-POM Munitions Assessment to the Force Application Functional Capabilities
Board (FA FCB) by February 1 of every even-numbered calendar year. This assessment phase
will seek JROC validation of the OY PTDs and Service/USSOCOM TMRs and should present
budgeting recommendations that mitigate significant or unacceptable risk in the POM.

   d. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall present the post-POM Munitions
Assessment to the FA FCB as soon as practical after receipt of the Military Service and
USSOCOM post-POM Sufficiency Assessment.

    e. The Munitions Assessments should be used by the Military Services and OSD to make
informed decisions during POM deliberations and the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and
Execution process. Issue Nominations or Change Requests will be submitted by the FA FCB if
warranted.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            12                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                                                                            DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009




                                                                               ENCLOSURE 4

                                                             DoD MRP IMPLEMENTATION TIMELINE

                                                                        Table. FY12 MRP CYCLE
                                                                                                      CY09      CY10                  CY11
                                                                                MONTH                 S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S
   T ask                                                                        R e s p o ns ib ility
 1 DoD MRP Working Group Meeting                                                AT&L / Joint Staff    X
 2 Guidance input to AT&L                                                       USD(P) /Joint Staff   X
 3 Issue Implementation Guidance Memo                                           USD(AT&L) / USD(P)      X
 4 DIA Issues Threat Report (December 1st(draft)/January 1st)                   DIA                         X X
 5 Distribution of Threat Report before and after final release                 Joint Staff                 X X
 6 Near-Year PTD Distributed March 1st                                          CCDRs                             X
 7 Out-Year PTD Distributed May 1st                                             Joint Staff                           X
 8 Provide TMR to USD(AT&L) and ASD(SO/LIC&IC)                                  USSOCOM                                           X
 9 Services Unconstrained Munitions Requirements November 1st                   Military Departments                              X
10 Distribution of Munitions Requirements                                       Joint Staff                                       X
11 Provide USSOCOM TMR changes to USD(AT&L) by November 15                      ASD(SO/LIC&IC)                                    X
12 Constrained Requirements & Sufficiency Assessment (pre-POM)                  Mil Depts/CCDRs                                       X
13 GDF POM 12 (January / February)                                              USD(P)                                                X
14 Muntions Assessment (pre-POM)                                                Joint Staff / CCDRs                                     X
15 JPG POM 12 (April / May)                                                     DoD                                                         X
16 Revised Service Inventories (21 days after August POM submit)                Military Departments                                                   X
17 Sufficiency Assessment (post-POM) 21 Days after POM Submit                   Mil Depts/CCDRs                                                        X
   Munitions Assessment (post-POM) to FA FCB
18 (10 days after post-POM inventories submit)                                  Joint Staff / Mil Depts.                                                                           X
                                                                                                       Guidance   TR/ PTD        Munitions Requirements   POM / Munitions Assessments



  Note: - Actual Production dates may be adjusted to align with the latest PPBES schedule                                          Acronyms
        - All tasks occur biennially
        - Dates listed in this timeline are representative of the FY 12 POM cycle                                                  CCDRs Combatant Commanders


        Change 2, 08/31/2018                                                            13                                                        ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                                             DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


                                                       ENCLOSURE 5

                      DoD MRP STEERING COMMITTEE AND WORKING GROUP ORGANIZATIONS

                           Figure. DoD MRP Steering Committee and Working Group Organizations
Organization                       Office Designated by Head of Organization

USD(AT&L)                          OUSD(AT&L)/Acquisition & Technology/Portfolio Systems Acquisition/ Land Warfare &
                                   Munitions
USD(I)                             DUSD (Policy, Requirements, & Resources)
DIA                                Defense Intelligence Analysis Center, ISD/DWO-2 Strategic Plans and Assessments Division
                                   Defense Warning Office
USD(P)                             OUSD(P) Policy Planning
Director, CAPE                     Joint Data Support
Director, CAPE                     Tactical Air Forces Division
Joint Staff/J-8                    Force Application Division
Joint Staff/J-8                    Warfighting Analysis Division
Joint Staff/J-4                    Supply Division (Munitions)
Joint Technical Coordinating Group Munitions Effectiveness
United States Pacific Command      J54 Strategic Plans Division
United States Forces Korea         J35 Plans Division
United States Central Command      CCJ8-AR Assessment Branch/J-4
USSOCOM                            Center for Resources and Requirements-J8/Center for Acquisition and Logistics-J4
United States Air Force            A5RC Force Application Division
United States Army                 Headquarters, Department of the Army, Deputy Chief of Staff G-3/5/7
United States Navy                 Chief of Naval Operations N81 Assessments Division
United States Marine Corps         Marine Corps Combat Development Center, Capabilities Development Directorate, Logistics
                                   Integration Division

A current list of POCs and phone numbers will be maintained on the OSD (PA&E) Joint Data Support Web Site at
https://jds.pae.osd.smil.mil.



   Change 2, 08/31/2018                                       14                                              ENCLOSURE 5
                                                          DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


                                      GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ASD(SO/LIC)      Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity
                 Conflict

CAPE       Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
CDRUSSOCOM Commander, United States Special Operations Command
CONPLAN    contingency plan

DIA              Defense Intelligence Agency
DPS              defense planning scenario

FA FCB           Force Application Functional Capabilities Board
FYDP             Future Years Defense Program

JROC             Joint Requirements Oversight Council

MRP              Munitions Requirements Process
MRP SC           Munitions Requirements Process Steering Committee
MRP WG           Munitions Requirements Process Working Group
MSFD             multi service force deployments

NY               near-year

OPLAN            operational plan
OY               out-year

POM              program objective memorandum
PTD              phased threat distribution

SO               special operations

TMR              Total Munitions Requirement

USD(AT&L)        Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I)           Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)           Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USSOCOM          United States Special Operations Command

WRMR             War Reserve Munitions Requirement




Change 2, 08/31/2018                        15                          GLOSSARY
                                                                DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, all terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

Combat Requirement. The quantity of munitions required to equip a specified force structure to
perform its assigned military mission and to meet Combatant Command objectives, including
munitions needed for risk mitigation.

concept of operations. Defined in Reference (g).

constrained requirements. The munitions requirement limited by projected inventory.

Current Operations/Forward Presence Requirement. The sum of the munitions required to arm
forces to conduct current operations and meet forward presence obligations in accordance with
Reference (c). Forward presence includes Global Naval Force Presence Policy and operations
the President directs.

DoD Analytic Agenda. A DoD-wide agreement to make major, joint analysis efforts more
efficient and relevant. The DoD Analytic Agenda package is comprised of defense planning
scenarios, multi-Service force deployment documents, blue, green, and/or red concepts of
operations, baselines, tools and methods, studies, and integrated data used by DoD Components
as a foundation for strategic analysis in accordance with Reference (e).

force structure. Defined in Reference (g).

mid-term. The last year of the Future Years Defense Program.

modernization. Programmed improvements in the capabilities of forces, particularly in
equipment and munitions.

munitions. Defined in Reference (g).

Munitions Assessment. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Combatant Command-
generated assessment that addresses risk to the desired warfighting capabilities. Quantifies the
risk to overall warfighting ability in the NY and OY.

NY. Period of time leading up to the start of the FYDP in question (e.g., for POM 10, the NY
ends October 1, 2009).

optimal. The most favorable or desirable solution depending on factors involved.

OY. Last year of the FYDP in question (e.g., for POM 10, the FYDP is 2010-2015, and the OY
is 2015).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             16                            GLOSSARY
                                                               DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


phased threat distribution. The staged assignment of a portion of the enemy’s total combat
capability (e.g., forces, installations, and organizations) to DoD Component commands. The
distribution is a percentage by type of target (e.g., tanks and fighters) by OPLAN phases.

readiness. Defined in Reference (g).

risk mitigation. The concept of deliberately duplicating target coverage among various units to
defeat an unexpected disposition of enemy forces and manage other risks related to munitions
inventories.

Strategic Readiness Requirement. The quantity of munitions needed to arm forces not
committed to support combat operations in the assigned major combat operations, as well as
those in the strategic reserve. Includes any additional munitions requirements generated from
treaties or statutory obligations to allies.

Sufficiency Assessment. Military Service and USSOCOM-generated assessment for Military
Services that identifies PTD targets not killed for each TMR submission. Also provides an
overview of munitions requirement versus inventories through the FYDP, aggregated by target
and threat capabilities as specified by USD(AT&L). For USSOCOM, identifies difference
between inventory levels and requirements and the associated risk.

target reconstitution and regeneration rates. These rates consist of two estimates: the proportion
of targets that could be repaired by the enemy after a successful attack and the average time to
repair a target. These rates are a function of enemy capabilities and the various types of targets.

Threat Report. A collection of quantitative and qualitative assumptions, estimates, and facts
about the threat specified in the implementation guidance that U.S. and allied forces may face
during the NY and OY period. The report presents the DIA’s estimate of enemy capabilities in
three levels of detail, ranging from type and numbers of weapons to an analysis of expected
trends in modernization of weaponry and force structure.

TMR. The sum of all munitions requirements, to include the sum of war reserve munitions
requirement and training and testing requirement.

Training and Testing Requirement. The munitions required to train the force and support
Military Department programs, ensuring that weapons and platforms deliver the intended
effectiveness (can be stated as an annual requirement, an FYDP requirement, and/or projected
life cycle of each munition). Surveillance, acceptance testing, and production losses of
munitions items are accounted for in this category.

unconstrained requirement. The munitions requirement, not limited by projected inventory or
funding. However, it may be limited by reasonable production capacity; weapon system
capabilities (integration); and externally defined caps on procurement (outside the TMR
provider).



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            17                            GLOSSARY
                                                       DoDI 3000.04, September 24, 2009


WRMR. The sum of Combat Requirements, Strategic Readiness Requirements, and Current
Operations/Forward Presence Requirements.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                      18                        GLOSSARY
