                                 Department of Defense
                                    INSTRUCTION

                                                                           NUMBER 1304.12E
                                                                            September 20, 2005

                                                                                        USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: DoD Military Personnel Accession Testing Programs

References: (a) DoD Directive 1304.12, “DoD Military Personnel Accession Testing
                 Programs,” June 22, 1993 (hereby canceled)
             (b) Deputy Secretary of Defense memorandum, "DoD Directives Review –
                 Phase II," July 13, 2005
            (c) DoD Directive 1145.2E, "United States Military Entrance Processing Command
                 (USMEPCOM)," January 8, 2005
            (d) DoD 5025.1-M, “DoD Directives System Procedures,” March 5, 2003


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Instruction:

   1.1. Reissues reference (a) as a DoD Instruction to the guidance in reference (b).

   1.2. Updates policies and responsibilities for the Active and Reserve components of the
Military Services on:

       1.2.1. The DoD Enlistment Testing Program.

       1.2.2. The DoD Student Testing Program.

       1.2.3. The DoD In-Service Testing Program.

       1.2.4. The DoD Overseas Testing Program.

     1.2.5. Use of a common aptitude test, the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery
(ASVAB), for the programs in subparagraphs 1.2.1. through 1.2.4.

   1.3. Continues to assign responsibilities for:

       1.3.1. The research, preparation, printing, and maintenance of the ASVAB.
                                                                DoDI 1304.12E, September 20, 2005



       1.3.2. Test control and administration.

       1.3.3. Test scoring.

       1.3.4. Maintenance and distribution of enlistment processing records and test scores.

       1.3.5. Investigation of test irregularities.

    1.4. Continues to define responsibilities for the Manpower Accession Policy Working Group
and the Manpower Accession Policy Steering Committee on resolving test development,
implementation, and maintenance problems, and making policy recommendations in these areas
to the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)).

    1.5. Continues to define responsibilities for the Secretary of the Army as the DoD Executive
Agent for the U.S. Military Entrance Processing Command (USMEPCOM) who shall have
fiscal, administrative, and management support responsibilities for the DoD Enlistment, Student,
and Overseas Testing Programs according to DoD Directive 1145.2E (reference (c)).

   1.6. Authorizes publication of further DoD guidance on DoD Military Personnel Accession
Testing Programs consistent with DoD 5025.1-M (reference (d)).


2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments
(including their Reserve components and the Coast Guard, by agreement with the Department of
Homeland Security when it is not operating as a Service in the Navy), the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and
all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense. The term “Military Services,” as
used herein, refers to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, and the Coast Guard,
by agreement with the Department of Homeland Security when it is not operating as a Service
within the Department of the Navy.


3. POLICY

It is DoD policy that the ASVAB is the only aptitude test battery authorized for determining
enlistment eligibility. The following policies apply to the use of the ASVAB in the DoD military
personnel accession testing programs:

   3.1. DoD Enlistment Testing Program

       3.1.1. The purpose of the DoD Enlistment Testing Program is to provide an applicant’s
sponsoring recruiting Military Service with aptitude test results. The sponsoring recruiting
Military Service shall then determine the applicant’s eligibility for enlistment.




                                                  2
                                                                   DoDI 1304.12E, September 20, 2005



       3.1.2. Except as provided for in subparagraph 3.4.3., enlistment tests shall be
administered by the USMEPCOM or by other organizations designated by the Secretary of the
Army, as the DoD Executive Agent for the USMEPCOM. The ASVAB shall be administered at
Military Entrance Processing Stations (MEPSs) and at Mobile Examining Team (MET) sites
assigned to the MEPSs.

       3.2.3. Each applicant must sign a copy of the current Enlistment Testing Program
Privacy Act Statement before taking the test. Applicants refusing to sign the agreement shall be
excused from the testing sessions.

       3.1.4. To ensure the integrity of ASVAB test scores, coaching performance on the
ASVAB by the Military Services is prohibited; however, basic skills development is permitted
with approval by the USD(P&R).

       3.1.5. Except as provided for in subparagraph 3.4.4., all non prior Military Service
applicants shall be tested by the USMEPCOM unless:

         3.1.5.1. They have valid ASVAB scores received as a result of being tested in the
DoD Student Testing Program; or

           3.1.5.2. They have taken the enlistment test within the previous 2-year period and
possess valid test scores.

        3.1.6. Enlistment eligibility established by the test shall be valid for a period not to
exceed 2 years from the date of test administration. If an individual takes the test more than
once, the last full set of valid test scores are the scores of record. Only scores of record can be
used for enlistment processing purposes.

        3.1.7. Voluntary enlistment retesting is authorized 1 month after the first test, 1 month
after the first retest, and at 6-month intervals thereafter.

       3.1.8. The USMEPCOM shall administer specialized tests as required by the Military
Services and approved by the USD(P&R).

       3.1.9. Requests for applicant test scores shall be reviewed and approved by the Office of
the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Military Personnel Policy) (ODUSD(MPP)), under the
USD(P&R), except for test score data routinely provided to applicants, the Military Services, and
the DMDC.

   3.2. DoD Student Testing Program

       3.2.1. The purposes of the DoD Student Testing Program are to:

            3.2.1.1. Provide the Military Services with access to the high school market and
recruiters with prequalified recruiting leads.




                                                  3
                                                                  DoDI 1304.12E, September 20, 2005



           3.2.1.2. Provide a public service for U.S. youth with the offer of a career exploration
program, free of charge, to secondary and post-secondary schools, when a school permits
ASVAB testing.

         3.2.2. The student ASVAB shall be offered primarily to high school juniors and seniors,
and post-secondary school students; however, high school sophomores are also eligible to take
the test. The ASVAB shall not be administered to students below the tenth grade.

       3.2.3. Coaching performance on the ASVAB is prohibited (see subparagraph 3.1.1.).

       3.2.4. Students enrolled in high schools shall:

           3.2.4.1. Be encouraged by recruiters to stay in school and graduate.

           3.2.4.2. Not be accepted for active duty enlistment without prior notice to the school.

           3.2.4.3. Be required to provide parental or guardian consent, unless they provide
proof of emancipation, if they enlist before 18 years of age.

       3.2.5. School officials shall be provided:

           3.2.5.1. Information on the value of the ASVAB as a measure of vocational aptitude.

           3.2.5.2. Student test scores and school summary data.

            3.2.5.3. Publications that assist counselors and students to understand the test results
and use the results to explore the civilian and military worlds of work. School personnel shall be
required to select the recruiting release option for their students.

       3.2.6. Requests for student test scores shall be reviewed and approved by the
ODUSD(MPP), except for test score data routinely provided to students, schools, the Military
Services, and the DMDC.

       3.2.7. The Inter-Service Recruitment Committees (IRCs) shall develop program goals
and plan contacts with school authorities for soliciting their participation in the DoD Student
Testing Program or allowing military career program presentations. The assignment of schools
and/or areas to individual Military Services for promotion and scheduling of the DoD Student
Testing Program shall be in the same proportion as the Military Services’ current fiscal year non
prior Military Service enlistment projections, or as agreed to by a local IRC.

        3.2.8. Each student must sign a copy of the current Student Testing Program Privacy Act
Statement before taking the test. Students refusing to sign the agreement shall be excused from
the testing sessions.

       3.2.9. Schools shall be encouraged to inform students of career opportunities available in
the Military Services.



                                                 4
                                                                  DoDI 1304.12E, September 20, 2005




        3.2.10. The ASVAB shall be administered in schools by USMEPCOM personnel or
personnel authorized by the Headquarters (HQ), Department of the Army. Military recruiting
personnel may not administer, distribute, or collect tests or test answer sheets. Schools shall be
encouraged to provide proctors during ASVAB testing. Recruiting personnel, with the local
MEPS commander’s authorization, may also proctor test sessions. However, in each room
where recruiters are used as proctors, a USMEPCOM-authorized test administrator must be
present. The HQ, USMEPCOM, may, as an exception to policy, grant approval for recruiter
assistance in administering large student testing sessions.

        3.2.11. Based on the recruiter release option selected by each school, the USMEPCOM
shall concurrently provide the Military Services with aptitude scores for the juniors, seniors, and
post-secondary students tested.

        3.2.12. Applicants with current (within 2 years of testing date) student ASVAB
qualifying scores shall not be required to retest for enlistment; however, those holding valid
scores may voluntarily retest at a MEPS or MET site if allowable under retest policies.
Applicants may be required to take additional special tests required to determine eligibility for
training and assignment opportunities.

       3.2.13. Each Recruiting Service shall establish its own goals for the DoD Student
Testing Program and provide this information to the HQ, USMEPCOM. The achievement of
these goals is a Military Service responsibility.

        3.2.14. The Reserve components of the Military Services shall be encouraged to
participate in the administration of the DoD Student Testing Program.

       3.2.15. Military Service recruiters may not administer Service-unique tests and/or
instruments in high schools or post-secondary schools without prior approval of the USD(P&R).

   3.3. DoD In-Service Testing Program

         3.3.1. The primary purpose of the DoD In-Service Testing Program is to provide aptitude
tests to the Military Services for use in retesting Service members.

       3.3.2. The Manpower Accession Policy Working Group shall provide the Military
Services with a minimum of two forms of the Armed Forces Classification Test (AFCT) for use
in Service-specific retesting programs.

       3.3.3. To ensure ASVAB security, only Service-designated test control officers, test
administrators, and test examiners shall handle AFCT materials.

        3.3.4. The Military Services shall be responsible for printing and reprinting all In-Service
testing materials.




                                                 5
                                                                 DoDI 1304.12E, September 20, 2005




   3.4. DoD Overseas Testing Program

        3.4.1. The purpose of the DoD Overseas Testing Program is to provide an opportunity to
test military applicants and Department of Defense Dependents Schools’ (DoDDS) students
overseas with the ASVAB, provide the Military Services with prequalified recruiting leads, and
provide the DoDDS with a testing program that is useful for career guidance and counseling
purposes.

       3.4.2. The Military Services are responsible for operation of the overseas testing
program, except for U.S. Territories, which are the responsibility of the USMEPCOM.

        3.4.3. To ensure ASVAB security, only Service-designated, overseas test control
officers, test administrators, and test examiners shall handle ASVAB test materials.

        3.4.4. The Military Services are responsible for testing applicants and DoDDS students
and for sending testing and enlistment processing documents to the USMEPCOM for entry into
the DoD computerized student and applicant databases.

        3.4.5. In overseas student ASVAB sessions, military recruiters have responsibility for
coordinating, scheduling, and providing proctor support, in conjunction with the school. Military
recruiters shall not handle, distribute, or collect test materials.

       3.4.6. Coaching performance on the ASVAB is prohibited (see subparagraph 3.1.1.).

        3.4.7. Upon receipt of appropriate student test session materials from overseas testing
personnel, the USMEPCOM is responsible for scoring the tests and forwarding the ASVAB
results and/or products to the DoDDS; scores also shall be provided to the Military Services.

       3.4.8. The USMEPCOM is responsible for providing training, as required, to overseas
Military Service test administration personnel, recruiters, and DoDDS guidance counselors.

        3.4.9. The USMEPCOM is responsible for reporting overseas test scores and accession
data, and documenting problems, when identified, to the ODUSD(MPP) and the Military
Services.

    3.5. The Chair of the Manpower Accession Policy Steering Committee shall be a
representative from the ODUSD(MPP); the Committee shall be composed of Military Service
general and/or flag officers from their respective offices of the Deputy Chiefs of Staff for
Personnel and the Commander of the USMEPCOM, with the Director of the DMDC as a
nonvoting member. The Steering Committee’s main function shall be to provide policy
recommendations on military personnel selection and classification processing issues to the
USD(P&R). It shall meet when called at the request of one of its members and with concurrence
of the majority.




                                                6
                                                                   DoDI 1304.12E, September 20, 2005



    3.6. The Chair of the Manpower Accession Policy Working Group shall be a representative
of the USD(P&R); the Working Group shall provide technical support and policy
recommendations to the Manpower Accession Policy Steering Committee and the USD(P&R).
The Group’s membership shall consist of representatives of the ODUSD(MPP), the OASD(RA),
Service-testing policy staff officers, scientists representing each of the Military Service personnel
research activities, representatives of the DMDC, and representatives of the USMEPCOM. The
Chair may request representation from other organizations to address specific agenda items. The
Group’s responsibilities shall be to resolve ongoing problems in military personnel selection and
classification research and ASVAB development, implementation, and maintenance. It will also
review all DoD Student Testing Program publications before submission to the USD(P&R) for
approval and subsequent printing and distribution. While the Group shall be a joint activity, its
members shall represent the positions of, and be responsible to, their individual Military Service
or Agency. In this manner, the specific interests of each Military Service and the USMEPCOM
can be discussed and considered. The Group shall meet quarterly or when called by the Chair.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    4.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)) shall set
policy on military personnel accession testing and shall ensure that under the USD(P&R), the
Director, DMDC, shall:

        4.1.1. Have responsibility for ASVAB R&D, including software associated with the
Computerized Adaptive Test version of the ASVAB (CAT-ASVAB). The DMDC is assigned
overall responsibility for R&D, calibration, and quality control for the ASVAB testing programs,
consistent with general policies established by the USD(P&R).

       4.1.2. Serve as lead organization for ASVAB R&D, in coordination with personnel
research activities of the Military Services.

         4.1.3. Plan, program, budget, and finance ASVAB-related research.

       4.1.4. Prepare three categories of materials for Enlistment, Student, and
In-Service Testing Programs. These materials include:

            4.1.4.1. Test materials, such as test booklets, scoring keys, and administration
manuals.

       4.1.4.2. Career counseling materials for the Student Testing Program, such as the
ASVAB Career Exploration Guide.

            4.1.4.3. Training aids (Recruiter’s Guide, Education Services Specialist Handbook,
etc.).

             4.1.5. Provide print-ready copies of the materials in subparagraphs 4.1.4.1. through
4.1.4.3. to the Agency responsible for printing.



                                                 7
                                                                    DoDI 1304.12E, September 20, 2005




           4.1.6. Integrate and have R&D responsibility for Joint-Service aptitude tests,
prepared by other Agencies for use in the enlistment testing program when such tests become
fully operational (e.g., as accomplished with the CAT-ASVAB and the Assembling Objects
subtest).

         4.2. The Secretary of the Army, as the DoD Executive Agent for the USMEPCOM, has
fiscal, administrative, and management support responsibilities for the DoD Enlistment, Student,
and Overseas Testing Programs, consistent with reference (c) and policies established by the
USD(P&R), and shall:

        4.2.1. Provide resources required to establish, equip, and maintain the USMEPCOM
units. This shall be done in coordination with the Military Services, and, for matters related to
the assignment of Reserve component personnel to the USMEPCOM units, with the Office of
the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Reserve Affairs) (ASD(RA)), under the USD (P&R).

       4.2.2. Program, budget, and fund all USMEPCOM operations.

       4.2.3. Provide required civilian authorizations and staffing.

       4.2.4. Administer the DoD Enlistment and Student Testing Programs, except for
overseas testing as specified in subparagraph 3.4.2.

        4.2.5. Implement quality assurance procedures to ensure the accuracy of the test battery
for enlistment processing.

    4.2.6. Report results of test irregularity investigations through the DMDC to the
ODUSD(MPP).

        4.2.7. When approved by the USD(P&R), administer additional tests to determine
qualifications for specific military occupations or assignments.

       4.2.8. Provide the results of test irregularity investigations and quarterly reports on both
the DoD Enlistment and Student Testing Programs to the Manpower Accession Policy Working
Group.

        4.2.9. Print and distribute the initial supplies of test materials, counseling materials, and
training aids (see subparagraph 4.1.1.5.) for use in the DoD Enlistment, Overseas, and Student
Testing Programs.

       4.2.10. Maintain sufficient stock of all materials required to administer the current
ASVAB versions used in the DoD Enlistment, Overseas, and Student Testing Programs, to
include reprinting (after review by the Manpower Accession Policy Working Group and
approval by the USD(P&R)) of existing materials with or without slight modification (updating),
and distribute the materials.




                                                  8
                                                              DoDI 1304.12E, September 20, 2005



       4.2.11. Print and distribute ASVAB promotional materials and novelty items for use in
marketing the DoD Student Testing Program.

       4.2.12. Provide operational test and item data as required by the DMDC.

       4.2.13. Provide at each MEPS an ASVAB Educational Services specialist as the primary
point-of-contact for the DoD Student Testing Program.


5. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




                                              9
