                              Department of Defense
                                     DIRECTIVE

                                                                                  NUMBER 1400.5
                                                                                  January 12, 2005

                                                                                           USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: DoD Policy for Civilian Personnel
References (a) DoD Directive 1400.5, “DoD Policy for Civilian Personnel,”
               March 21, 1983 (hereby canceled)
           (b) DoD Directive 1400.6, “DoD Civilian Employees in Overseas Areas,”
               February 15, 1980
           (c) Sections 2301(b), 2302(b), and 2305 of title 5, United States Code

1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive reissues reference (a) to update references and proponent position title.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all
other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as
the "DoD Components"), and to its nonappropriated fund activities.

3. POLICY

       3.1. Policies for DoD civilian personnel employed in overseas areas are set forth in reference
(b).

    3.2. It is DoD policy to use civilian employees in all positions that do not require military
incumbents for reasons of law, training, security, discipline, rotation, or combat readiness, or that
do not require a military background for successful performance of the duties involved.




                                                   1
                                                                             DoDD 1400.5, January 12, 2005



     3.3. In carrying out their responsibilities for civilian personnel management, DoD managers
shall be guided by the policies in this Directive, the merit system principles in Section 2301(b) of
title 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) (reference (c)), except as may be otherwise provided by
Section 2305 of reference (c). Managers shall also be familiar with the prohibited personnel
practices in Section 2302(b) of reference (c).

   3.4. Principals of DoD policy for civilian personnel is provided in enclosure 1.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    4.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness shall oversee DoD policy
for civilian personnel.

   4.2. The Heads of the DoD Components shall comply with the provisions of this Directive.


5. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosure – 1
 E1. Principals of DoD Policy for Civilian Personnel




                                                 2
                                                                             DoDD 1400.5, January 12, 2005



                                E1. ENCLOSURE 1
                PRINCIPALS OF DOD POLICY FOR CIVILIAN PERSONNEL

The DoD Components shall conduct their relationships with civilian employees in accordance
with the following principles:

    E1.1.1. There shall be no discrimination because of race, sex, marital status, age, color,
religion, national origin, lawful political affiliation, labor organization membership, or
handicapping condition.

    E1.1.2. Employees shall be placed in jobs for which they are qualified and shall be given
equal opportunities for advancement. Selections to fill positions shall be made impartially on the
basis of merit and fitness.

    E1.1.3. Training and development required to improve present job performance and meet
future skill needs shall be provided.

   E1.1.4. Employee work performance shall be evaluated fairly and objectively on a
continuing basis, and the results of such evaluation shall be discussed with the employee.

   E1.1.5. Within whatever compensation schedule applicable, employees shall receive similar
pay treatment for work of substantially similar difficulty and responsibility.

   E1.1.6. Working conditions shall be made as safe and healthful as possible.

    E1.1.7. Recognizing that a well-informed work force is a productive work force, employees
and their recognized labor organizations shall be informed, insofar as possible, of plans and
policies affecting them and their employment.

   E1.1.8. Employees shall be encouraged to express themselves concerning improvement of
work methods and working conditions.

    E1.1.9. Employees shall have the right, without interference, coercion, restraint, or reprisal,
to join or refrain from joining any lawful labor organization or employee association. When
employees are represented by a recognized labor organization, management officials and
supervisors shall endeavor to build a relationship with that organization based upon mutual
respect and trust.

    E1.1.10. Any employee having a grievance or complaint shall be accorded immediately a
fair and prompt discussion with the supervisor concerned, and failing prompt and satisfactory
adjustment, shall have the right to pursue the matter under an applicable grievance or complaint
system. In presenting a grievance or complaint an employee shall be free from interference,
restraint, or reprisal, and may be accompanied and assisted by a representative.

    E1.1.11. Employees shall have the right to discuss their problems with their supervisor,
personnel office, equal employment opportunity officer or counselor, labor organization



                                                 3                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                             DoDD 1400.5, January 12, 2005



representative, a person designated to provide guidance on questions of conflict of interest, or a
supervisory or management official of higher rank or level than the immediate supervisor.

   E1.1.12. Employees shall have the right to participate or not to participate, without
compulsion, coercion, or reprisal, in voluntary fund-raising campaigns and the purchase of U.S.
Savings Bonds.

    E1.1.13. Employees shall be treated with full regard for their dignity as individuals, and no
distinctions as to trustworthiness of employees shall be made on the basis of their wage levels or
grades.

   E1.1.14. Supervisors shall contribute to the formulation of official policy and shall represent
management in the administration of policy and labor-management agreements. They shall
provide progressive and constructive leadership and shall ensure that all employees understand
what is expected of them, to whom they are responsible, and their work relationships with fellow
workers.




                                                 4                                     ENCLOSURE 1
