                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 8000.01
                                                                                 March 17, 2016
                                                            Incorporating Change 1, July 27, 2017

                                                                                         DoD CIO

SUBJECT:      Management of the Department of Defense Information Enterprise (DoD IE)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 8000.01 (Reference (a)) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities for DoD information resources management (IRM) activities to the Chief
Information Officer of the Department of Defense (DoD CIO).

    b. Implements sections 2222, 2223, and 2224 of Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.)
(Reference (b)), chapter 113 of Title 40, U.S.C. (Reference (c)), chapters 35 and 36 of Title 44,
U.S.C. (Reference (d)), and Office of Management and Budget Circular A-130 (Reference (e))
by establishing policy for the management of the DoD IE.

    c. Provides direction on creating an information advantage for DoD personnel and mission
partners and establishing and defining roles for chief information officers (CIOs) and IRM
officials at various levels within DoD, in accordance with References (b), (c), (d), and (e).

    d. Provides direction for information sharing among all DoD Components and with mission
partners, in accordance with the DoD Instruction (DoDI) 8320.02 (Reference (f)) and the
National Strategy for Information Sharing and Safeguarding, (Reference (g)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within DoD (referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD
Components”).

   b. The United States Coast Guard. The United States Coast Guard will adhere to DoD
cybersecurity requirements, standards, and policies in this issuance in accordance with the
                                                                  DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


direction in Paragraphs 4a, b, c, and d of the Memorandum of Agreement Between the
Department of Defense and the Department of Homeland Security (Reference (x)).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Information is considered a strategic asset to DoD. It must be safeguarded, appropriately
secured and shared, and made available to authorized DoD personnel and mission partners to the
maximum extent allowed by law, DoD policy, and mission requirements, throughout the
information life cycle.

    b. Functional processes are to be examined, and if possible streamlined or improved, in order
to improve effectiveness and reduce cost before investment is made in information technology.

    c. Each DoD Component has a CIO or senior IRM official who coordinates directly with the
Component head and with the DoD CIO on behalf of the Component head. CIOs also may be
designated at subordinate levels, although a reporting mechanism through the Component CIO
must be maintained to ensure unity of purpose.

    d. All aspects of the DoD IE, including the DoD information network infrastructure, DoD
enterprise IT service and solutions, National Security Systems, Industrial Control Systems, and
embedded computing of wired, wireless, mobile communication, and platforms will be planned,
designed, developed, architected, configured, acquired, managed, operated, and protected in
order to help achieve an information advantage and full spectrum superiority, deliver mission
assurance, improve mission effectiveness, and realize IT efficiencies.

    e. The architecture that describes the DoD IE, as defined in this directive, will be designated
the DoD Information Enterprise Architecture (DoD IEA). The DoD IEA will:

        (1) Be developed, maintained, and applied to guide IT investment portfolio strategies
and decisions, define IT capability and interoperability requirements, establish and enforce IT
standards, and guide cybersecurity requirements in accordance with DoDI 8500.01 (Reference
(h)), across the DoD.

        (2) Serve as the DoD CIO’s contribution to the DoD Enterprise Architecture (DoD EA),
which consists of architectures from Intelligence, Warfighting, and Business Mission Areas as
well as DoD Component architectures.

   f. In accordance with DoDI 8115.02 (Reference (i)), IT investments should link mission
needs, information, and technology while efficiently managing resources and implementing
DoDI 8510.01 (Reference (j)).

    g. Investments in information solutions should be managed through a capital planning and
investment control process that:

       (1) Is performance- and results-based.



Change 1, 07/27/2017                             2
                                                                  DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016



        (2) Provides for analyzing, selecting, controlling, and evaluating investments, as well as
assessing and managing associated risks.

       (3) Interfaces with the DoD key decision support systems for capability identification;
planning, programming, budgeting, and execution; and acquisition.

       (4) Requires the review of all information technology (IT) investments for compliance
with architectures, IT standards, and related policy requirements.

       (5) Addresses life-cycle management

    h. IT will be developed in useful increments that are as narrow in scope and brief in duration
as practical; each increment will solve a specific part of an overall mission problem and deliver a
measurable net benefit independent of future increments.

     i. Pilots, modeling and simulation, experimentation, and prototype/proof of concept projects
should be considered, especially when large, high-risk investments in IT are involved. These
pilots, models, and other prototype or proof of concepts projects must be appropriately sized, and
of limited duration to achieve desired objectives, and not used in lieu of testing or acquisition
processes to implement the production version of the information solution.

    j. A highly qualified and capable cyberspace workforce must be recruited, developed, and
retained to evolve the DoD IE in order to maintain an information advantage consistent with
DoDD 8140.01 Reference (k)). The entire DoD workforce will need to be trained and prepared
to work in the evolving DoD IE.

   k. In accordance with section 794d of Title 29, U.S.C. (Reference (l)), DoD employees or
members of the public with disabilities seeking information or services from the DoD must have
access to and use of information and data comparable to the access and use by individuals
without disabilities, unless such access and use would impose an undue burden on the DoD.

        (1) In addition, section 794d of Reference (l) requires that federally conducted or
assisted activities be reasonably modified to accommodate covered individuals with disabilities
when the modifications are necessary to avoid unlawful discrimination of the basis of disability,
unless making the modifications would result in an undue burden or fundamentally alter the
nature of the activity, and section 791 of Reference (l) requires that a covered employee or
applicant for employment with a disability be reasonably accommodated.

         (2) These obligations may include reasonable modifications or accommodations to
facilitate access to IT systems by covered individuals with disabilities.

    l. To operationalize the DoD IE, DoD will, to the maximum extent practical, architect its
systems for interoperability and openness, and deliver secure, device-agnostic, digital services
for the best value in accordance with Office of Management and Budget Memorandum M-13-13
(Reference (m)), DoDI 8330.01 (Reference (n)), and DoDI 8310.01 (Reference (o)).



Change 1, 07/27/2017                             3
                                                               DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016



    m. New and existing IT investments and services will support achieving the goals and
objectives of the DoD IRM Strategic Plan (Reference (p)) and support the implementation of the
joint information environment (JIE) strategy (Reference (q)), and DoDI 8110.01 (Reference (r)).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

6. SUMMARY OF CHANGES 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative. These
changes add and update references for accuracy. Applicability was extended to the U.S. Coast
Guard in Section 2.b.

7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective March 17, 2016.




                                               Robert O. Work
                                               Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 07/27/2017                           4
                                                                 DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


                                         ENCLOSURE 1

                                         REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 8000.01, “Management of the Department of Defense Information
      Enterprise,” February 10, 2009 (hereby cancelled)
(b)   Title 10, United States Code
(c)   Title 40, United States Code
(d)   Title 44, United States Code
(e)   Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-130, “Management of Federal
      Information Resources,” November 28, 2000
(f)   DoD Instruction 8320.02, “Sharing Data, Information, and Technology (IT) services in the
      Department of Defense,” August 5, 2013
(g)   White House Office of the Press Secretary, “National Strategy for Information Sharing and
      Safeguarding,” December 19, 2012
(h)   DoD Instruction 8500.01, “Cybersecurity,” March 14, 2014
(i)   DoD Instruction 8115.02, “Information Technology Portfolio Management
      Implementation,” October 30, 2006
(j)   DoD Instruction 8510.01, “Risk Management Framework (RMF) for DoD Information
      Technology (IT),” March 12, 2014, as amended
(k)   DoD Directive 8140.01, “Cyberspace Workforce Management,” August 11, 2015
(l)   Title 29, United States Code
(m)   Office of Management and Budget Memorandum M-13-13, “Open Data Policy—Managing
      Information as an Asset,” May 9, 2013
(n)   DoD Instruction 8330.01, “Interoperability of Information Technology (IT), Including
      National Security Systems (NSS),” May 21, 2014
(o)   DoD Instruction 8310.01, ‘Information Technology Standards in the DoD,”
      February 2, 2015
(p)   DoD FY2014 Information Resources Management Strategic Plan, May 30, 2014
(q)   The DoD Strategy for Implementing the Joint Information Environment,
      September 28 2013
(r)   DoD Instruction 8110.01, “Mission Partner Environment (MPE) Information Sharing
      Capability Implementation for the DoD,” November 25, 2014
(s)   Initial Capabilities Document (ICD) for The Joint Information Environment (JIE), v3.1,
      April 28, 2014
(t)   DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003
(u)   DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,” January 7, 2015, as
      amended
(v)   CJCS Instruction 8010.01C, “Joint Community Warfighter Chief Information Officer,”
      November 1, 2013
(w)   Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
      Associated Terms,” current edition




Change 1, 07/27/2017                            5                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                        DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016

(x)   Memorandum of Agreement Between the Department of Defense and The Department of
      Homeland Security Regarding Department of Defense and U.S. Coast Guard Cooperation
      on Cybersecurity and Cyberspace Operations, January 19, 20171




1
 Available at https://dcms.uscg.afpims.mil/Our-Organization/Assistant-Commandant-for-C4IT-CG-6-/The-Office-
of-Information-Management-CG-61/Interagency-Agreements/


Change 1, 07/27/2017                                 6                                    ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. DoD CIO. In addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, the DoD CIO:

   a. Serves as the DoD senior official for IRM matters.

    b. Reports to and advises the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense on the information
resource implications of strategic planning decisions.

   c. Oversees the development and maintenance of, and facilitates the use of, a DoD
Enterprise Architecture (DoD EA) by major processes of DoD.

    d. Oversees DoD IT investments through the development, implementation and use of the
DoD IEA, which describes the future DoD IE, including cybersecurity measures and practices, as
follows:

       (1) DoD investments for the information enterprise are supported by regularly updated
inventory of DoD-wide IT hardware, software, networks, and computing and storage centers;
and

       (2) The DoD CIO will establish governance mechanisms and standards to ensure
compliance with and management of changes to the DoD IEA.

   e. Ensures the integration and synchronization of DoD IE activities.

    f. Establishes mechanisms to facilitate organizationally tiered compliance reviews for IT
investments to ensure compliance with enterprise architectures, privacy requirements, and IT
standards, including networks, cybersecurity, data standards, and related policy requirements.
DoD CIO will act as the oversight authority for IT compliance.

   g. Serves as the JIE lead and guides DoD in the delivery of the JIE.

    h. Guides the DoD Components in aligning their IRM activities with the desired outcomes
and goals of the JIE in accordance with the Initial Capabilities Document (ICD) for The Joint
Information Environment (JIE) (Reference (s)).

    i. Oversees information policy and ensures IT capability requirements are reflected in
architectures and plans across DoD as a means of guaranteeing information safeguarding,
sharing, visibility, trustworthiness, accessibility, and interoperability.




Change 1, 07/27/2017                            7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


2. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). Pursuant to section 11316 of Reference (c), in
addition to the responsibilities in section 4, and in coordination with the DoD CIO and the Under
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)), the
USD(C)/CFO establishes policies and procedures to ensure that accounting, financial, and asset
management systems and other related DoD information solutions are designed, developed, and
maintained, and used effectively to provide financial data reliably, consistently, quickly, and in
support of programmatic investment decisions.


3 DEPUTY CHIEF MANAGEMENT OFFICER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. In
addition to the responsibilities in section 4, the Deputy Chief Management Officer of the
Department of Defense collaborates with the DoD CIO to ensure that the business transformation
and DoD IE policies and program are designed and managed to improve performance standards,
economy, and efficiency.


4. OSD and DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The OSD and DoD Component heads:

    a. Improve DoD operations and procedures by ensuring the application of sound business
practices and compliance with this directive.

    b. Oversee the evaluation and improvement of functional processes before making
significant investments in IT, to:

      (1) Determine whether the function that IT will support is central to, or a priority for,
DoD’s mission.

       (2) Determine the most appropriate and cost effective service provider for IT, ensuring
that DoD's cybersecurity posture is not jeopardized and critical mission capabilities are retained.

         (3) Determine whether the private sector or another government agency can perform the
function more effectively, ensuring that DoD’s cybersecurity posture is not jeopardized and
critical mission capabilities are retained.

    c. Ensure that information policy and functional requirements are reflected in architectures
and plans across DoD and Component-level enterprises as a means to guarantee information
safeguarding, sharing, visibility, trustworthiness, accessibility, and interoperability.

    d. Participate in DoD oversight processes for IT acquisition and ensure functional
leadership, management, and control of these resources throughout their life cycles. Those
processes conducted under the Defense Acquisition System will be in accordance with DoDD
5000.01 (Reference (t)) and DoDI 5000.02 (Reference (u)).




Change 1, 07/27/2017                             8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


5. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this
enclosure, the DoD Component heads:

    a. Appoint a Component CIO or senior IRM official with core knowledge, skills, abilities,
and experience to carry out the IRM requirements of References (b), (c), (d), and (e), and the
policies in this directive.

     (1) Position the DoD Component CIO or senior IRM official to participate in the
Component’s strategic planning, management, and decision processes.

       (2) Promote and forge a strong partnership among the Component’s CIO and
Comptroller, DoD Component Acquisition Executive or similar position, as well as other key
senior managers and external mission partners.

       (3) Designate subordinate-level CIOs or IRM officials, as needed, and ensure that the
subordinate reporting mechanism goes through the Component CIO or senior IRM official.

   b. Align the Component’s IT investment portfolio with DoD IE policies and guidance, as
required.

    c. Oversee the DoD Component CIOs or senior IRM officials. The DoD Component CIOs
or senior IRM officials:

      (1) Have responsibilities and authorities as delegated in this directive. Military
Department CIOs will have additional responsibilities as defined in Reference (b).

       (2) Head an office responsible for ensuring that the component complies with, and
promptly, efficiently, and effectively implements the policies and responsibilities in this directive
and the requirements of References (b), (c), (d), and (e).

        (3) Ensure that information policy and functional requirements are reflected in
architectures and plans across the DoD and Component level enterprises as a means to guarantee
information safeguarding, sharing, visibility, trustworthiness, and interoperability.

        (4) Require that DoD IT is designed for interoperability and openness, and comply with
established well-defined standards in order to deliver secure, device-agnostic, digital services for
the best value, in accordance with References (m), (n) and (o).

      (5) Ensure IT meets DoD regulations, instructions, and policies prior to installation into
the DoD-wide enterprise.

       (6) Establish programs to hire, train, and retain the information management, IT, and
cybersecurity workforce, consistent with this directive.

       (7) Participate in DoD CIO-led forums for governing the DoD IE.




Change 1, 07/27/2017                             9                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


       (8) Ensure Component policy supports DoD-wide enterprise policy.


6. CJCS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 4 and 5 of this enclosure, the CJCS
appoints a Joint Community Warfighter CIO, consistent with CJCS Instruction 8010.01C,
(Reference (v)).




Change 1, 07/27/2017                            10                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


                                            GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CIO                    chief information officer
CJCS                   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


DoD CIO                Department of Defense Chief Information Officer
DoDD                   DoD directive
DoDI                   DoD instruction
DoD IE                 DoD Information Enterprise
DoD IEA                DoD Information Enterprise Architecture


IRM                    information resources management
IT                     information technology


JIE                    joint information environment


U.S.C.                 United States Code
USD(AT&L)              Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
                       Logistics
USD(C)/CFO             Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                       Department of Defense


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

cybersecurity. Defined in Reference (h).

cyberspace. Defined in the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference (w)).

device-agnostic. A service that is developed to work regardless of the user’s device, e.g. a
website that works whether viewed on a desktop computer, laptop, smartphone, media tablet or
e-reader.

digital services. Include the delivery of digital information (i.e., data or content) and
transactional services (e.g., online forms, benefits applications) across a variety of platforms,
devices, and delivery mechanisms (e.g., websites, mobile applications, and social media)



Change 1, 07/27/2017                             11                             GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


DoD Enterprise Architecture. A federation of descriptions that provides context and rules for
accomplishing the DoD mission. These descriptions are developed and maintained at the
Department, Capability Area, and Component levels and collectively define the people,
processes, and technology required in the “current” and “target” environments, and in the
roadmap for transition to the target environment.

DoD enterprise IT service. An IT service that is offered by one DoD Component to all DoD
Components.

DoD IE. The DoD information resources, assets, and processes required to achieve an
information advantage and to share information across DoD and with mission partners. It
includes:

   The information itself and the Department’s management over the information life cycle;

   The processes, including risk management, associated with managing information to
accomplish the DoD mission and functions;

    Activities related to designing, building, populating, acquiring, managing, operating,
protecting, and defending the information enterprise; and

    Related information resources such as personnel, funds, equipment, and IT, including
internal use software and national security systems.

DoD IEA. The description of the DoD IE including the infrastructure, communications systems
and services (i.e., systems and facilities for transferring data between persons and equipment),
the computing systems and services (i.e., integrated sets of components for collecting, storing,
and processing data for delivering information, knowledge, and digital products for organizations
and individuals to manage their operations), and the functional processes (i.e., the structured
activities or tasks that produce a specific service or product) for DoD IE customers.

DoD information network. Defined in Reference (w).

information advantage. The superior position or condition derived from the ability to access,
share, and collaborate securely via trusted information in order develop to more rapidly
awareness and to execute decisions than an adversary while exploiting or denying an adversary’s
ability to do the same.

information environment. Defined in Reference (w).

information life cycle. The stages through which information passes, typically characterized as:
creation or collection; processing; dissemination; use; storage; and disposition.

Internal Use Software. Software that:

   Is acquired or developed to meet the entity’s internal or operational needs (intended
purpose); and

Change 1, 07/27/2017                            12                            GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


    Is a stand-alone application, or the combined software components of an IT system that can
consist of multiple applications, modules, or other software components integrated and used to
fulfill the entity’s internal or operational needs (software type).

    Internal Use Software can be purchased from commercial vendors “off-the-shelf”, modified
“off the shelf,” internally developed, or contractor developed.

IRM. The process of managing information resources to accomplish agency missions and to
improve agency performance, including through the reduction of the information collection
burden on the public. The term encompasses both information itself and the related resources,
such as personnel, equipment, funds, and IT.

IT. Any equipment or interconnected system or subsystem of equipment used in the automatic
acquisition, storage, manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching,
interchange, transmission, or reception of data or information by the executive agency.

    This includes if the equipment is used by the executive agency directly or is used by a
contractor under a contract with the executive agency that requires the use of that equipment; or
of that equipment to a significant extent in the performance of a service or the furnishing of a
product.

    IT includes computers, ancillary equipment, software, firmware, and similar procedures,
services (including support services), and related resources, but does not include any equipment
acquired by a federal contractor incidental to a federal contract.

IT investment. The expenditure of IT resources to address mission delivery and management
support.

   An IT investment may include a project or projects for the development, modernization,
enhancement, or maintenance of a single IT asset or group of IT assets with related functionality,
and the subsequent operation of those assets in a production environment.

    All IT investments should have a defined life cycle with start and end dates, with the end date
representing the end of the currently estimated useful life of the investment, consistent with the
investment's most current alternatives analysis if applicable.

   When the asset(s) is essentially replaced by a new system or technology, the replacement
should be reported as a new, distinct investment, with its own defined life cycle information.

IT service. An IT capability designed to provide awareness of, access to, and delivery of data or
information made available for consumption by one or more users. Users can be an individual,
organization, or machine.

JIE. A secure environment, composed of shared IT infrastructure, enterprise services, and a single
security architecture to achieve full-spectrum superiority, improve mission effectiveness,
increase security, and realize IT efficiencies.



Change 1, 07/27/2017                            13                           GLOSSARY
                                                               DoDD 8000.01, March 17, 2016


mission partners. Those with whom DoD cooperates to achieve national goals, such as other
departments and agencies of the U.S. Government, State and local governments, allies, coalition
members, host nations and other nations, multinational organizations, non-governmental
organizations, and the private sector.

National Security System. Defined in section 3552 of Reference (c).




Change 1, 07/27/2017                          14                           GLOSSARY
