                              Department of Defense
                                     DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 3300.03
                                                                                January 11, 2011
                                             Incorporating Change 2, Effective November 2, 2020

                                                                                         USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:      DoD Document and Media Exploitation (DOMEX)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

   a. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides direction for DoD DOMEX in
accordance with DoD Directive (DoDD) 5105.21 and Intelligence Community (IC) Directive
Number 302 (References (a) and (b)).

    b. Implements the DoD responsibilities in Reference (b) for national intelligence DOMEX,
including the responsibility to support the IC DOMEX Committee (DOMEXCOM).

    c. Establishes the Defense DOMEX Council (DDC) to coordinate DoD DOMEX matters
that fall outside the purview of the DOMEXCOM. (See Enclosure 2.)


2. APPLICABILITY

    a. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all
other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively
as the “DoD Components”).

   b. Nothing in this Directive shall alter or supersede the existing authorities of the Director of
National Intelligence regarding national intelligence DOMEX.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.
                                                                DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. DoD DOMEX capabilities shall be maintained at all times. While emphasizing support
for current military, intelligence, DoD law enforcement, and security operations, the Department
of Defense shall expand and deploy DOMEX capabilities to support its future needs as an
independent DOMEX provider and as a community leader in DOMEX activities involving other
Federal departments and agencies, and State or local government operations.

    b. The processes for collection, analysis, and dissemination of DoD DOMEX-derived
information shall:

       (1) Be integrated into military operational planning and execution at all levels, to
include:

           (a) Training U.S. combatants on the collection and handling of DOMEX materials.

          (b) Providing the means for identifying, exploiting, and producing reports on
documents and electronic media of immediate tactical value at the lowest appropriate operational
echelon.

        (2) Be based upon standardized methods of collecting and processing documents and
media captured or otherwise acquired during DoD operations, with a focus on rapid and broad
dissemination of both raw data and finished exploitation products to tactical, operational,
strategic, and national customers.

       (3) Be in accordance with national DOMEX activities in Reference (b) by:

           (a) Using the National Media Exploitation Center (NMEC) as the central DoD
clearinghouse for processing DoD-collected documents and media.

           (b) Maintaining technical interoperability and adhering to data and other standards of
the national DOMEX system architecture, as developed by the IC DOMEXCOM.

        (4) Comply with DoDD 5240.01 and DoD 5240.1-R (References (c) and (d)) in
executing intelligence activities, with DoD Instruction 3025.21 (Reference (e)) in support of law
enforcement officials and activities, and with DoD Instruction 5400.11, DoD 5400.11-R, and
section 803 of Public Law 100-53 (References (f), (g), and (h)) with respect to privacy and civil
liberties.

       (5) Support all OSD Principal Staff Assistants in fulfilling their responsibilities,
including responsibilities related to counterterrorism, law enforcement, intelligence, and
homeland defense, to leverage the use of DOMEX capabilities to support the widest range of
DoD needs.

   c. Standards and procedures for maintenance, collection, use, or dissemination of DOMEX
products shall seek to balance the goal of maximizing the availability of DOMEX materials and



Change 2, 11/02/2020                             2
                                                                 DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


products with the need to identify and protect materials that require protection under law or
policy.

        (1) Documents and media that are or have been involved in DoD DOMEX processing
shall be withheld from any dissemination system that may reveal sources or methods that would
endanger any DoD, law enforcement, intelligence, or homeland security operation.

        (2) Information derived from DOMEX shall be processed in a manner that maximizes
release to U.S. Federal, State, local, and tribal authorities, as well as foreign partners, while
protecting sources and methods; complying with all applicable laws, regulations, and policies
concerning U.S. persons; and in accordance with the provisions of Reference (d).

    d. Information derived from DOMEX shall be made available for use in military operations
as rapidly as feasible.

  e. The collection, use, and release of personally identifiable information derived from
DOMEX shall comply with the requirements of References (f) and (g).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 3.


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The reporting requirements in this Directive are
exempt from licensing in accordance with Paragraph 1.b.(9) of Enclosure 3 in Volume 1 of DoD
Manual 8910.01 (Reference (i)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Directive is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This administrative change:

    a. Updates the title of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary
of Defense for Intelligence and Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (j)).

   b. Updates references.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                             3
                                                         DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective January 11, 2011.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. DDC
   3. Responsibilities
   Glossary




Change 2, 11/02/2020                        4
                                                            DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(b) Intelligence Community Directive Number 302, “Document and Media Exploitation,”
    July 6, 2007
(c) DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(d) DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components
    That Affect United States Persons,” December 1, 1982, as amended
(e) DoD Instruction 3025.21, “Defense Support of Civilian Law Enforcement Agencies,”
    February 27, 2013, as amended
(f) DoD Instruction 5400.11, “DoD Privacy and Civil Liberties Programs,” January 29, 2019
(g) DoD 5400.11-R, “DoD Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(h) Section 803 of Public Law 110-53, “Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11
    Commission Act of 2007,” August 3, 2007
(i) DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
    DoD Internal Information,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(j) Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
    December 20, 2019
(k) DoD Directive 7045.14, “The Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE)
    Process,” January 25, 2013, as amended
(l) Joint Publication 2-01, “Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations,”
    October 7, 2004
(m) National Security Directive 42, “National Policy for the Security of National Security
    Telecommunications and Information Systems,” July 5, 1990
(n) DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
    Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(o) DoD Directive 8521.01E, “DoD Biometrics,” January 13, 2016, as amended
(p) DoD Instruction 8330.01, “Interoperability and Supportability of Information Technology
    (IT) and National Security Systems (NSS),” May 21, 2014, as amended
(q) DoD Directive 5111.13, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
    Security (ASD(HD&GS)),” March 23, 2018
(r) DoD Directive 5505.13E, “DoD Executive Agent (EA) for the DoD Cyber Crime Center
    (DC3),” March 1, 2010, as amended




Change 2, 11/02/2020                          5                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                              DDC


1. PURPOSE. The DDC shall:

  a. Be the primary forum for coordinating activities and resolving issues related to DoD
DOMEX.

    b. Identify the best practices of DoD DOMEX operations and appropriately document and
disseminate these practices throughout the Department of Defense, the IC, and the law
enforcement and homeland security communities.

   c. Identify gaps in DoD DOMEX capabilities and develop recommendations on policy
changes or other initiatives to improve DoD DOMEX activities or programs.

   d. Refer DoD DOMEX issues or problems on which consensus cannot be reached to the
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) for resolution.


2. MANAGEMENT AND MEMBERSHIP

   a. The USD(I&S) shall select the DDC Chair from within the Office of the USD(I&S). The
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), shall provide administrative and management
support to the DDC.

   b. The membership of the DDC shall be limited to full-time or permanent part-time
Government employees or military members and shall consist of:

       (1) General or flag officers or equivalent civilian representatives provided by the:

          (a) Director, DIA.

        (b) Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
(DIRNSA/CHCSS).

          (c) Director, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).

        (d) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
(USD(AT&L)).

          (e) Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)).

          (f) DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO).




Change 2, 11/02/2020                            6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                          DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


        (g) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global Security
(ASD(HD&GS)).

          (h) Secretaries of the Military Departments.

          (i) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

          (j) Commanders of the Combatant Commands, when requested by the USD(I&S).

       (2) Such other members as selected by the USD(I&S) based on DoD DOMEX
operations and activities.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                           7                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(I&S). The USD(I&S), in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure,
shall:

   a. Establish policy and provide oversight for all DoD DOMEX programs and activities.

    b. Review funding, activities, and programs across the Department of Defense in support of
DoD DOMEX requirements. In accordance with DoDD 7045.14 (Reference (k)), make
recommendations to the DoD Components engaged in DOMEX activities and programs on
adjustments to plans, programs, and budgets for DoD DOMEX capabilities to maintain
responsiveness to DoD mission needs.

    c. Serve as the primary DoD point of contact with Government, IC, and international entities
on all DOMEX-related activities unless otherwise specified in this Directive or existing statutes.

   d. Approve the DoD DOMEX Classification Guide.

    e. Appoint a representative from the Office of the USD(I&S) to chair the DDC; select DDC
members in addition to those set forth in Enclosure 2, based upon DoD DOMEX operations and
activities.

   f. Resolve DoD DOMEX issues or problems on which the DDC cannot reach consensus.


2. DIRECTOR, DIA. The Director, DIA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I&S) and in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Appoint a representative to the DDC and provide administrative and management support
to the DDC.

    b. Assist the DDC Chair in presenting the results of DDC actions and recommendations to
the USD(I&S) to assist in DOMEX oversight and to provide context for DOMEX planning,
programming, and budgeting reviews.

   c. Staff and operate theater joint document exploitation centers and provide other support as
needed to implement Joint Publication 2-01 (Reference (l)).

    d. As the IC Executive Agent for the NMEC pursuant to References (a) and (b), and subject
to applicable legal and policy restrictions, provide NMEC support to the DoD Components,
including dissemination of national DOMEX-derived information according to Component
requirements.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                            8                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


    e. Develop the DOMEX Classification Guide and provide to the USD(I&S) for approval;
review the guide annually and provide necessary updates to the USD(I&S) for approval.

    f. As the Director, Defense Intelligence Operations Coordination Center, pursuant to
Reference (a), support coordination, planning, assessment, and advocacy for DoD DOMEX
collection requirements and capabilities in support of the Combatant Commands.


3. DIRNSA/CHCSS. The DIRNSA/CHCSS, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I&S) and pursuant to National Security Directive 42 (Reference (m)), shall, in addition to
the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure:

   a. Provide a representative to the DDC.

  b. Support the development and execution of signals intelligence-related portions of
DOMEX operational plans and procedures.

   c. Advise the DDC on DOMEX systems, data, and architecture to protect National Security
Systems.


4. DIRECTOR, NGA. The Director, NGA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I&S) and in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Provide a representative to the DDC.

  b. Support the development and execution of geospatial intelligence-related portions of
DOMEX operational plans and procedures.


5. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L), in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this
enclosure, shall:

   a. Provide a representative to the DDC.

    b. Establish procedures to review information and media received through international
cooperative research and development programs in accordance with DoDD 5134.01 (Reference
(n)) for its potential value in DOMEX, and, subject to the provisions of the applicable
international agreement(s) concerning disclosure and use of information exchanged or generated
under the agreement(s), ensure that the media is made available to the NMEC for DOMEX
processing.

    c. Ensure that DoD biometrics, in accordance with DoDD 8521.01E (Reference (o)), and
forensics databases can accommodate biometric and forensic data that may be obtained through
DOMEX processing of documents such as passports, passport applications, photos, videos, and
other captured media.



Change 2, 11/02/2020                           9                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011




6. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R), in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure,
shall:

   a. Provide a representative to the DDC.

   b. Advise the DDC on policies and processes to further DoD DOMEX support to civilian
law enforcement officials pursuant to Reference (e).


7. DoD CIO. The DoD CIO, in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure,
shall:

   a. Provide a representative to the DDC.

   b. Pursuant to DoDD 4630.05 (Reference (p)) and in coordination with the USD(I&S),
advise the DDC on DOMEX systems, data, and architectures to maximize interoperability and
supportability for DoD and interagency information technology and National Security Systems
supporting DOMEX within the Department of Defense and across the IC.


8. ASD(HD&GS). The ASD(HD&GS), under the authority, direction, and control of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy and in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this
enclosure, shall:

   a. Provide a representative to the DDC.

    b. Pursuant to DoDD 5111.13 (Reference (q)) and in coordination with the USD(I&S),
advise the DDC on development of DoD policies and procedures related to DOMEX capabilities
in support of homeland defense.

   c. As required, provide program advice and assistance to the DDC to help further DOMEX
support of civil authorities.


9. HEADS OF THE OSD AND DoD COMPONENTS ENGAGED IN DOMEX ACTIVITIES
AND PROGRAMS. The Heads of the OSD and DoD Components engaged in DOMEX
activities and programs shall:

   a. Include resources for DoD DOMEX capabilities in their planning, programming, and
budgeting processes.

    b. Make optimal use of Government resources and commercially available products and
services, including hardware, software, forensics, and translation support.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                          10                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


   c. Share DOMEX capabilities among their Components to the fullest extent feasible;
coordinate all sharing arrangements through the DDC.


10. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Provide a representative to the DDC for each Military Service.

    b. Establish and maintain DOMEX capabilities in support of national intelligence needs and
military operations.

    c. Develop and maintain Service-unique standardized DOMEX training curricula focused on
the skills required by combat unit site exploitation teams, military intelligence analysts, and unit
staffs.

   d. Develop and maintain close operational ties with the NMEC.


11. SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. The Secretary of the Air Force, in addition to the
responsibilities in sections 9 and 10 of this enclosure, and as the designated DoD Executive
Agent for the DoD Cyber Crime Center pursuant to DoDD 5505.13E (Reference (r)), shall
program for and budget sufficient resources to meet DOMEX digital and multimedia (D/MM)
forensics requirements. These requirements include:

  a. Establishing and maintaining a DoD D/MM laboratory that can provide reach back for
NMEC.

    b. Developing and providing D/MM forensics training and certification for DoD DOMEX
personnel.

    c. Operating a research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) program for D/MM
forensics and making RDT&E program products and tools available to all organizations
performing DoD DOMEX missions.


12. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Provide a representative to the DDC.

   b. Validate joint requirements for DOMEX capabilities for the joint force.

    c. Review and assess the adequacy of DOMEX programs and budgets to support joint
objectives and operational plans, and ensure the integration of DOMEX capabilities into strategic
and operational plans as applicable.



Change 2, 11/02/2020                            11                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011



    d. Develop and maintain joint operational DoD DOMEX doctrine.


13. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as appropriate, and in
addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall provide a representative to the
DDC as requested by the USD(I&S).


14. COMMANDERS OF THE GEOGRAPHIC COMBATANT COMMANDS. The
Commanders of the geographic Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, as appropriate, and in addition to the responsibilities in sections 9 and 13 of this
enclosure, shall, in coordination with the Director, DIA, develop and implement Command-
specific plans, concepts of operation, and procedures on the conduct of DOMEX activities in
their theaters of operations.


.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                              12                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDD 3300.03, January 11, 2011


                                          GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(HD&GS) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
           Security
DoD CIO    DoD Chief Information Officer

D/MM             digital and multimedia
DDC              Defense DOMEX Council
DIA              Defense Intelligence Agency
DoDD             DoD directive
DOMEX            document and media exploitation
DOMEXCOM         DOMEX Committee

IC               intelligence community

NGA              National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
NMEC             National Media Exploitation Center
NSA              National Security Agency

RDT&E            research, development, test, and evaluation

USD(AT&L)        Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I&S)         Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
USD(P&R)         Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                   PART II. DEFINITIONS

DOMEX. For the purpose of this Directive, the processing, translation, analysis, and
dissemination of collected hard-copy documents and electronic media that are under U.S.
Government physical control and are not publicly available. In the Department of Defense this
includes the handling of documents and media during their collection, initial review, inventory,
and input to a database.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                           13                                   GLOSSARY
