                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 3002.01
                                                                                  April 16, 2009
                                                           Incorporating Change 2, May 24, 2017

                                                                                          USD(P)

SUBJECT: Personnel Recovery in the Department of Defense

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

    a. Incorporates and cancels DoD Directive (DoDD) 2310.2 (Reference (a)) and DoD
Instruction (DoDI) 2310.3 (Reference (b)) as a single Directive to establish policy and realign
responsibilities for personnel recovery in the Department of Defense.

   b. Defines the responsibilities for personnel recovery regarding the preparation of forces and
operational planning and ensures that DoD personnel recovery responsibilities and procedures
adapt to meet emerging requirements.

   c. Identifies the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)) as OSD’s Principal Staff
Assistant (PSA) responsible for personnel recovery strategy, policy development, and
operational oversight through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and
Low Intensity Conflict (ASD(SO/LIC)) according to DoDD 5110.10 (Reference (c)).

    d. Operational implementation of joint personnel recovery policy and doctrine shall be with
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA), as a
Chairman’s controlled activity, shall be the DoD office of primary responsibility (OPR) and
execute these responsibilities as noted in Enclosure 2.


2. APPLICABILITY

    a. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the
Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


    b. Memorandums of agreement or memorandums of understanding (MOUs) entered into by
non-DoD organizations with the Department of Defense dealing with personnel recovery shall
include terms making the provisions of this Directive applicable to those organizations.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Preserving the lives and well-being of U.S. military, DoD civilians, and DoD contractor
personnel authorized to accompany the U.S. Armed Forces who are in danger of becoming, or
already are, beleaguered, besieged, captured, detained, interned, or otherwise missing or evading
capture (hereafter referred to as “isolated”) while participating in U.S.-sponsored activities or
missions, is one of the highest priorities of the Department of Defense. DoD contractor
personnel authorized to accompany U.S. forces are identified in DoDI 3020.41 (Reference (d)).
The military, DoD civilians, and DoD contractor personnel authorized to accompany the U.S.
Armed Forces are hereafter referred to as “DoD personnel.”

    b. The Department of Defense has an obligation to train, equip, and protect its personnel,
prevent their capture and exploitation by adversaries, and reduce the potential for using isolated
personnel as leverage against U.S. security objectives. Commanders at all levels must link force
protection programs and personnel recovery as a means of preserving the force. This requires
commanders to maintain situational awareness of their personnel during all phases of military
operations.

    c. The Department of Defense shall not offer payment of ransom or grant concessions for the
return of any person identified in paragraph 4.a. The prohibition against ransom and concessions
is not intended to prevent efforts to elicit information that leads to the return of isolated
personnel, nor does it prevent the award of compensation obligated by the use of a blood chit
(see Appendix J of Joint Publication 3-50 (Reference (e)) by DoD or other authorized personnel.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Web Site at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.




Change 2, 05/24/2017                            2
                                                             DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective April 16, 2009.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Personnel Recovery Action Group
Glossary




Change 2, 05/24/2017                        3
                                                             DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


                                     ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 2310.2, “Personnel Recovery,” December 22, 2000 (hereby canceled)
(b) DoD Instruction 2310.3, “Personnel Recovery Response Cell (PRRC) Procedures,” June 6,
    1997 (hereby canceled)
(c) DoD Directive 5110.10, “Defense Prisoner of War/Missing Personnel Office (DPMO),”
    September 21, 2005
(d) DoD Instruction 3020.41, “Operational Contract Support,” December 20, 2011, as amended
(e) Joint Publication 3-50, “Personnel Recovery,” December 20, 2011
(f) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended
(g) Sections 1501-1513 of title 10, United States Code
(h) DoD Instruction O-3002.05, “Personnel Recovery (PR) Education and Training,” April 12,
    2016
(i) Federal Acquisition Regulations, March 2005 (with amendments through March 15, 2012)
(j) Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement, August 17, 1998 (with changes
    through March 12, 2012)
(k) Director of Defense Research and Engineering, “Defense Technology Area Plan,” January
    1997
(l) Director of Defense Research and Engineering, “Joint Warfighting Science and Technology
    Plan,” January 1997
(m) DoD Instruction 3115.10E, “Intelligence Support to Personnel Recovery,” March 24, 2006
(n) Executive Order 10631, “Code of Conduct for Members of the Armed Forces of the United
    States,” August 17, 1955, as amended
(o) DoD Instruction 3003.01, “DoD Support to Civil Search and Rescue (SAR),” September
    26, 2011, as amended
(p) Department of Homeland Security, “National Search and Rescue Plan,” August 2, 2007
(q) DoD Instruction 2310.05, “Accounting for Missing Persons – Boards of Inquiry,”
    January 31, 2000, as amended
(r) DoD Instruction 3002.03, “DoD Personnel Recovery – Reintegration of Recovered
    Personnel,” July 15, 2013, as amended
(s) Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Memorandum, “DoD Readiness
    Reporting System Interim Implementation Guidance Serial 3.0,” January 17, 2006
(t) DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulations (FMR),” as
    amended
(u) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Program Decision Memorandum (PDM),”
    December 1, 2006
(v) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Realignment of the Joint Personnel Recovery
    Agency (JPRA) Under the Department of the Air Force,” November 25, 2011




Change 2, 05/24/2017                        4                         ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(P). The USD(P), in addition to the responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Oversee the implementation of sections 1501-1513 of title 10, United States Code
(Reference (g)) and DoD policy, strategy, and plans for recovering isolated personnel.

   b. Serve as the OSD PSA responsible for overseeing DoD personnel recovery activities.


2. USD(P) CHIEF OF STAFF (CoS). The USD(P) CoS, under the authority, direction, and
control of the USD(P), shall:

    a. Serve as the principal civilian advisor to the Secretary of Defense and to the USD(P) on
personnel recovery.

   b. Assist in providing oversight of the DoD personnel recovery activities pursuant to
guidance of the USD(P).

    c. Designate the Office of the DASD(POW/MPA) as the OPR for developing personnel
recovery policy and strategy and overseeing the operational implementation of personnel
recovery policy.


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARIES OF DEFENSE FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY
AFFAIRS (ASD(ISA)), HOMELAND DEFENSE ANDGLOBAL SECURITY
(ASD(HD&GS)), AND ASIAN & PACIFIC SECURITY AFFAIRS (ASD(A&PSA)). The
ASD(ISA), ASD(HD&GS), and ASD(A&PSA), under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(P), shall coordinate all issues involving personnel recovery with the USD(P) CoS
through the DASD(POW/MPA).


4. ASD(SO/LIC). The ASD(SO/LIC), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P),
shall coordinate all special operations activities, force protection, and counterterrorism policy
efforts involving personnel recovery with the USD(P) CoS through the DASD(POW/MPA).



5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L), in addition to the responsibilities in section 15
of this enclosure, shall review all personnel recovery-related acquisition efforts and issue
guidance necessary to modernize and integrate capabilities to meet Combatant Command
requirements. Additionally, the USD(AT&L) shall:

                                                5
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009



   a. Support acquisition of personnel recovery capabilities.

    b. Evaluate and resource, as appropriate, modeling and simulation requirements identified by
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

    c. As the Defense Acquisition and Procurement Executive, ensure all aspects of contract
development and contractor management consider and address requirements for personnel
recovery.

    d. Coordinate with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to ensure that contracts
associated with contractor employees deploying with the force in accordance with Reference (d)
address personnel recovery requirements as identified by the Combatant Command in
accordance with DoDI O-3002.05 (Reference (h)). Ensure the personnel recovery requirements
of the Federal Acquisition Regulations and the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulations
(References (i) and (j)) are incorporated into DoD contracts, as appropriate.

   e. Include personnel recovery requirements in the Defense Science and Technology planning
process, the Defense Technology Area Plan (Reference (k)), the Joint Warfighting Science and
Technology Plan (Reference (l)), and other planning documents, as appropriate.

   f. Support personnel recovery-related advanced concept technology demonstrations, as
appropriate.

     g. Coordinate with the USD(P), through the USD(P) CoS and the DASD(POW/MPA), and
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to ensure Combatant Command and Military
Department acquisition solutions for personnel recovery requirements address integration and
interoperability with evolving systems and programs. Address the importance of system and
program integration and interoperability with other U.S. Government departments, agencies,
allies, and partner-nation forces.

    h. Ensure personnel recovery capabilities are integrated into relevant acquisition programs
(ground, sea, air, and/or space), including survival and life support equipment; command,
control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR); and
other information systems linking ground, sea, air, space power, and cyber power.

    i. Use the Personnel Recovery Technology Working Group to coordinate technological
solutions to personnel recovery requirements.


6. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)). The USD(I), in
addition to the responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Provide management and oversight to the Intelligence Community for intelligence support
to personnel recovery, in accordance with DoDI 3115.10E (Reference (m)).



                                               6
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


  b. Ensure Defense intelligence, counterintelligence, and security components support
Combatant Command personnel recovery requirements.

    c. Ensure Defense intelligence capabilities address objectives contained in national
personnel recovery policy.

    d. Ensure Defense intelligence and counterintelligence provides multidisciplinary peacetime,
crisis, contingency, and combat intelligence support for personnel recovery planning and
execution.



7. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R), in addition to the responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure,
shall:

   a. Develop policy requiring personnel recovery in DoD Component education and training
programs.

    b. Develop policy requiring that the Military Departments and United States Special
Operations Command (USSOCOM) identify and report the level of personnel recovery and Code
of Conduct (CoC) training proficiency of all assigned personnel.

   c. Develop, implement, and oversee policies and procedures that require commanders
maintain by-name accountability of all DoD personnel deployed abroad.


8. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). The USD(C)/CFO, in addition to the
responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure, shall fund or resource blood chit (Reference (e))
claims against the Department of Defense as requested by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.


9. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (GC DoD). The GC DoD,
in addition to the responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure, shall review all policy and legal
issues applicable to the isolation of DoD personnel to ensure compliance with U.S. law, the law
of armed conflict, and the CoC.


10. IG DoD. The IG DoD, in addition to the responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure,
shall provide the results of inspections that include findings or observations that pertain to
personnel recovery activities to the USD(P) CoS, the DASD(POW/MPA), and the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.




                                                  7
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


11. DoD CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (CIO). The DoD CIO, in addition to the
responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure, shall, in coordination with the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, USD(AT&L), and USD(I), ensure C4ISR architectures and planning
documents, such as C4 support plans, address personnel recovery information requirements
across the DoD Components. The focus is improved standardization and interoperability of
personnel recovery information derived from communication, alerting, tagging, tracking and
locating systems, and of information derived from intelligence sources. Oversee incorporation of
standardized personnel recovery information into common operational pictures, tactical displays,
collaborative tools, and other means of command and control, as appropriate.


12. ASSISTANT TO THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS
(ATSD(PA)). The ATSD(PA), in addition to the responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure,
shall:

   a. Develop, coordinate, and oversee standing public affairs (PA) plans and contingency
guidance in support of the DoD strategic communication plan for personnel recovery.

    b. Assist the USD(P), USD(P) CoS, DASD(POW/MPA), and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff with the development of a strategic communication plan for personnel recovery; oversee
all PA aspects during its implementation.

   c. Coordinate PA activities with the appropriate Combatant Command, Joint Staff Joint
Force Development Directorate (J-7), and USD(P) through the USD(P) CoS and
DASD(POW/MPA) as part of the strategic communication plan for personnel recovery.


13. DIRECTOR, COST ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAM EVALUATION (DCAPE). The
DCAPE, in addition to the responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure, shall, as appropriate,
review the costs, effectiveness, and capabilities for personnel recovery.


14. DASD(POW/MPA). The DASD(POW/MPA), under the USD(P) CoS, shall:

      a. Serve as the DoD lead for the development of national personnel recovery policy and
strategies.

        (1) Develop DoD policy for personnel recovery, personnel recovery education and
training, reintegration, and non-conventional assisted recovery; develop policy, as necessary, to
define DoD responsibilities for preparing forces to conduct personnel recovery in all operating
environments; and review other DoD policies, issuances, and guidance, as necessary, to ensure
personnel recovery is addressed.

       (2) Oversee implementation of policy for DoD participation in a national personnel
recovery system; facilitate and assist the development of personnel recovery architecture within



                                                 8
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


the Department of Defense; and represent the Secretary of Defense on personnel recovery issues
outside the Department.

    b. Assess policies, processes, and programs that influence the DoD ability to conduct
personnel recovery operations; recommend actions, as necessary, to enhance personnel recovery
capabilities.

    c. Serve as the focal point for the Secretary of Defense on personnel recovery policies across
the Department of Defense, among U.S. departments and agencies, and at international forums.

       (1) Facilitate DoD decisions denoting the point of transition from personnel recovery to
personnel accounting.

       (2) Represent the DoD personnel recovery equities as a special member of the National
Security Staff (NSS) Counterterrorism Security Group (CSG). Represent the Department of
Defense on personnel recovery policy matters as a member of the NSC CSG’s Hostage Working
Group, which oversees the implementation of national policy for personnel recovery.

       (3) Represent the Department of Defense on personnel recovery policy issues during
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) efforts to formulate and implement personnel
recovery policy.

        (4) Represent the Department of Defense as the functional expert on policy regarding the
use of civil search and rescue (SAR), military SAR assistance, and personnel recovery as a
theater security cooperation tool.

   d. Facilitate and oversee the development and implementation of the DoD strategic
communication plan for personnel recovery.

    e. Ensure all isolated personnel reports, intelligence, and data regarding circumstances
surrounding any isolating event, from report to reintegrate, are collected, retained, and preserved
and that this information is accessible for analysis by authorized planners and researchers.
Ensure that personnel recovery information systems support transparent movement of
information to personnel accounting processes when necessary.

   f. Monitor the development and implementation of the DoD capability to provide by-name
accountability of personnel deployed abroad.

    g. Organize and co-chair the Personnel Recovery Technology Working Group with the
Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Advanced Systems and Concepts, under the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), to coordinate technological solutions to personnel
recovery requirements.

       h. Co-host the biennial DoD Worldwide Personnel Recovery Conference with the Joint Staff
J-7.



                                                 9
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


    i. Represent the USD(P) at forums that affect personnel recovery issues, including forums
that address national military strategy development; the Joint Capabilities Integration and
Development System (JCIDS); and the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution
System (PPBES).

    j. Advise the ASD(SO/LIC) on personnel recovery policy as it relates to special operations
activities, force protection, and combating terrorism policy.

    k. Coordinate with the applicable ASD regional offices to integrate personnel recovery
activities into security cooperation strategy and planning to meet SecDef strategic regional and
security cooperation objectives.


15. HEADS OF THE DoD AND OSD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD and OSD
Components shall:

    a. Ensure personnel recovery preparation efforts keep pace with changes in the global
operating environment and that personnel recovery education and training prepares commanders
and staffs, operational forces, and individual personnel for personnel recovery across the range
of military operations.

    b. Be prepared to plan and execute personnel recovery operations with other interagency
partners when supporting or conducting operations under Chief of Mission (COM) authority.

   c. Be prepared to conduct interoperable and mutually cooperative personnel recovery
operations with partner and host nations, including leveraging host-nation capabilities to rescue
DoD personnel unilaterally whenever possible.

    d. Develop inter-Military Department and interagency support agreements, MOUs, and other
written arrangements when necessary to support a national personnel recovery system, determine
personnel recovery requirements, and address the responsibilities assigned in this Directive.

   e. Ensure personnel, including commanders and their staffs, are organized, trained, and
equipped to support personnel recovery and CoC in accordance with Reference (h) and
Executive Order 10631 (Reference (n)).

    f. Support civil search and rescue efforts according to DoDD 3003.01 and the National
Search and Rescue Plan (References (o) and (p)). This support shall not interfere with the
primary military duties, roles, and missions of the Department of Defense and shall occur
according to national military strategy and applicable national directives, plans, guidelines,
policies, and agreements.

    g. Ensure all information related to isolated personnel and the circumstances surrounding the
isolation event is collected, retained, and preserved in order to plan future personnel recovery
operations, support reintegration efforts, provide data for analysis of personnel recovery
histories, and to assist future accounting efforts, if necessary.

                                                 10
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009




16. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND COMMANDER,
USSOCOM (CDRUSSOCOM). In addition to the responsibilities in section 15 of this
enclosure, the Secretaries of the Military Departments and CDRUSSOCOM shall organize, train,
and equip forces to support personnel recovery requirements identified by the Combatant
Commanders. They shall:

   a. Develop and implement comprehensive strategies to address personnel recovery
requirements for DoD personnel at risk of becoming isolated and being exploited.

   b. Ensure sufficient personnel recovery capabilities are developed, programmed, and
budgeted to meet the Military Department and USSOCOM personnel recovery requirements.

   c. Ensure funding visibility of personnel recovery capabilities is maintained throughout the
PPBES process and keep the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff informed of all actions
involving personnel recovery funding changes.

    d. Coordinate for resolution by the Joint Staff any unresolved issues regarding personnel
recovery doctrine or training.

    e. Manage programs that affect personnel recovery according to guidance published by the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Support and participate in personnel recovery-related
activities.

    f. Ensure DoD personnel identified in paragraph 4.a. of the front matter of this Directive
receive personnel recovery training commensurate with their level of risk for becoming isolated
or exploited. Ensure commanders, staffs, and forces receive training according to their assigned
position when managing affairs surrounding a personnel recovery response.

    g. Ensure policies and procedures are in place to identify and track personnel who have
received Service and JPRA-conducted personnel recovery training.

   h. Comply with provisions of DoDI 2310.05 (Reference (q)) for determining the status of
missing persons and for comprehensive and timely collection, analysis, review, dissemination,
and periodic update of information related to such persons.

    i. Maintain an OPR for coordinating all personnel recovery matters and notify the USD(P)
(through the USD(P) CoS and DASD(POW/MPA)), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and
JPRA of the office designated.

   j. Support the development of joint personnel recovery-related doctrine, tactics, techniques,
and procedures and other guidance necessary to address the requirements of the Combatant
Commands.




                                               11
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


   k. Establish reintegration plans according to DoDI 3002.03 (Reference (r)) and in
coordination with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff guidance. Integrate the Military
Department and Combatant Command reintegration plans.

    l. Develop, facilitate, assess, and oversee personnel recovery technologies, joint
experiments, and tactics, techniques, and procedures development to meet the requirements of
the Combatant Commands and other Military Departments, when directed.

   m. Support joint manpower requirements requested and sourced through appropriate staffing
means and validated Joint Manning Documents.

    n. Provide representatives with operational expertise to advise the DASD(POW/MPA)
during meetings of the National Search and Rescue Committee.


   o. Ensure contractor employees authorized to deploy with the force in support of their
command or department are:

       (1) Properly identified, prepared, and accounted for in accordance with Reference (h).

     (2) Provided personnel recovery training and equipment to meet the Combatant
Commanders’ theater entry requirements.

    p. Establish a mission essential task list for all missions applicable to personnel recovery,
identify standards and conditions appropriate for each task, and report applicable readiness and
resource data for personnel recovery in the Defense Readiness Reporting System (DRRS) in
accordance with the DoD Readiness Reporting System Interim Implementation Guidance Serial
3.0 (Reference (s)) and other relevant instructions or guidance.

    q. Support the JPRA’s personnel recovery lessons learned responsibilities to ensure the
collection of all significant personnel recovery related data to provide accurate, thorough, and
objective accounts of circumstances surrounding the isolation of DoD personnel.

    r. Contribute current operational and historical personnel recovery-related data to the central
historical repository and archive and reference library managed by JPRA.


17. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In addition to the responsibilities
in sections 15 and 16 of this enclosure, the Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

    a. Within 60 days of completion, submit to the USD(P), through the USD(P) CoS and
DASD(POW/MPA), and to the JPRA, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
results of all Military Department survival, evasion, resistance, and escape (SERE) course
inspections and evaluations for a policy compliance review.




                                                12
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


    b. Be prepared to provide reintegration services, with assistance from JPRA, according to
Reference (r) to all contractors deploying with the force (CDF) and explain the benefits of
reintegration to defense contractors, their employees and, if appropriate, their families.


18. SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. In addition to the responsibilities in sections 15, 16,
and 17 of this enclosure, the Secretary of the Air Force shall:

    a. Continue to provide administrative support for financial management, manpower, and
personnel services for the JPRA. The Air Force shall fund the JPRA through the Future Years
Defense Program via the DoD PPBES.

    b. Coordinate personnel recovery-related funding in support of the JPRA through Air Force
PPBES processes. The Air Force Component/Major Command shall keep the Joint Staff J-7
informed of Service actions involving personnel recovery and JPRA programs of record as well
as PPBES actions regarding personnel recovery. As appropriate, coordinate, in advance, PPBES
adjustments with the USD(P), through the USD(P) CoS and DASD(POW/MPA).

  c. With respect to JPRA funding, comply with section 010110, Volume 2A, Chapter 1 of
DoD 7000.14-R (Reference (t)).


19. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. In addition to the responsibilities in sections 15, 16, and 17
of this enclosure, the Secretary of the Army shall program for and fund U.S. Southern
Command’s personnel recovery infrastructure requirements in accordance with Reference (u).


20. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. In addition to the responsibilities in
section 15 of this enclosure, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

   a. Oversee operational implementation of this Directive by the Combatant Commands.

    b. Coordinate and approve personnel recovery doctrine and tactics, techniques, and
procedures for recovering those personnel identified in paragraph 4.a. of the front matter of this
Directive and others designated by the President or Secretary of Defense. Synchronize U.S.
personnel recovery doctrine with NATO and partner nations as appropriate.

    c. Review contingency plans for preparing for and conducting a personnel recovery response
by the Combatant Commands to recover isolated personnel determined to be alive.

    d. Ensure that the Combatant Commands are appropriately tasked in Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff plans and orders to plan and conduct personnel recovery operations to report,
locate, support, recover, and reintegrate isolated personnel.

    e. Ensure that the Joint Requirements Oversight Council reviews Combatant Command
personnel recovery requirements for validation.

                                                13
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009



   f. Provide strategic military guidance to JPRA as the Joint Staff office responsible for
coordinating personnel recovery matters, in accordance with the Deputy Secretary of Defense
Memorandum (Reference (v)).

    g. In coordination with the USD(P), oversee DoD personnel recovery requirements
throughout the PPBES cycle and:

       (1) Assist the Military Departments in determining the merit of personnel recovery
requirement submissions.

       (2) Review the adequacy of resources proposed by the Military Departments to
determine whether they meet personnel recovery objectives and support Combatant
Commanders’ personnel recovery requirements.

       (3) Coordinate and recommend solutions for unresolved personnel recovery
requirements during programming and budget reviews.

       (4) Advise the Secretary of Defense of any changes needed to meet personnel recovery
requirements.

        (5) Support, as required, the Military Departments and USSOCOM in augmenting the
Universal Joint Task List for all missions applicable to personnel recovery in order to support the
reporting of applicable readiness and resource data for personnel recovery in the DRRS as per
paragraph 16.q. of this enclosure.


21. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. In addition to the
responsibilities in section 15 of this enclosure, the Commanders of the Combatant Commands
are responsible for planning and conducting personnel recovery within their area of
responsibility (AOR) across the spectrum of operational activity, and shall:

    a. Establish and maintain an OPR for personnel recovery operations, training, doctrine,
support, and execution. Notify the USD(P) (through the USD(P) CoS and DASD(POW/MPA)),
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and JPRA of
the office designated.

    b. Conduct personnel recovery operations for any individual in their AOR, as appropriate.
Personnel recovery operations will be coordinated, through the Joint Staff, with the Secretary of
State, Secretary of Defense, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and corresponding COM.

    c. In coordination with the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and respective COMs, conduct operational preparation of the environment and
activities to facilitate personnel recovery.




                                                14
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


    d. Establish command personnel recovery policies, plans, programs, and procedures to build
the capabilities necessary for timely and effective execution of the five personnel recovery tasks
(report, locate, support, recover, and reintegrate) for all DoD personnel who become isolated
from friendly control within the Command’s AOR.

       (1) Ensure the Service components understand minimum Combatant Command
personnel recovery requirements so that all personnel, including contractor employees authorized
to deploy with the force, have been properly identified, prepared, and accounted for in
accordance with Reference (h).

        (2) Be prepared to provide reintegration services, with assistance from JPRA and in
accordance with Reference (r), to all personnel as appropriate, including CDF. In the case of
repatriation of CDF, explain the benefits of reintegration to defense contractors, their employees
and, if appropriate, their families.

   e. Rehearse personnel recovery as an integral part of operational planning, training, and
exercise.

    f. Identify, document, validate, and prioritize personnel recovery requirements via
established DoD processes.

       (1) Coordinate personnel recovery requirements with the Joint Staff J-7 and JPRA.

      (2) Coordinate with the Secretaries of the Military Departments as necessary for
advocacy.

   g. In coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Secretaries of the
Military Departments, identify minimum personnel recovery training standards for theater entry.

        (1) Enforce minimum theater entry training requirements in accordance with References
(h), and (n).

       (2) Prepare for contingency contractor personnel in accordance with Reference (h).

    h. Develop favorable conditions through theater security cooperation to influence DoD
ability to build personnel recovery capacity through partner nation relationships.

    i. Comply with provisions of Reference (q) for assisting the Services in determining the
status of missing persons and for the systematic, comprehensive, and timely collection, analysis,
review, dissemination, and periodic update of information related to such persons.


   j. Establish procedures for the transition of operational records, intelligence, and
documentation with regard to missing DoD personnel to the Joint Staff J-7 (through JPRA),
Secretaries of the Military Departments, and the USD(P) through the USD(P)/CoS and
DASD(POW/MPA).

                                                15
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009



    k. Submit operational intelligence requirements for personnel recovery to the Defense
Intelligence Agency and JPRA.

   l. Delineate requirements to meet identified shortfalls and gaps and advise the Secretary of
Defense on deficiencies in personnel recovery capabilities.

    m. Support the JPRA’s personnel recovery lessons learned responsibilities to ensure the
collection of all significant personnel recovery-related data to provide accurate, thorough, and
objective accounts of circumstances surrounding the isolation of DoD personnel.

    n. Contribute current operational and historical personnel recovery-related data to the
historical central repository and archive and reference library managed by JPRA.


22. DIRECTOR, JOINT STAFF J-7. The Director, Joint Staff J-7, on behalf of the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:

   a. Serve as the lead directorate for JPRA on all matters requiring Joint Staff assistance and
coordination.

   b. Provide operational guidance to the Director, JPRA, as necessary.

   c. In coordination with the Director, JPRA, manage funds identified to support non-
conventional assisted recovery (NAR).

     (1) Develop and coordinate NAR funding and fiscal reporting procedures with OSD,
Combatant Commands, and other U.S. Government departments and agencies.

     (2) Disburse NAR funds as recommended by the Joint Staff and approved by the
USD(P).


    d. Co-host the biennial Worldwide Personnel Recovery Conference with the USD(P) or a
designated representative.


23. DIRECTOR, JPRA. The Director, JPRA, on behalf of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, shall:

    a. Retain the authority and exercise responsibilities for providing unified (joint) operational
personnel recovery guidance and capabilities development to the Combatant Commands and the
Military Departments. Provide planning, operational support, and PR expertise to DoD
Components and interagency partners, as appropriate, to facilitate PR preparation, planning,
execution, and adaptation.



                                                16
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


       (1) Establish clear operational lines of communication with the USD(P) through the
USD(P) CoS and DASD(POW/MPA) on personnel recovery policy matters, and with the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Combatant Commanders, and the Secretaries of the
Military Departments on operational initiatives to build consensus and establish joint standards.

        (2) Integrate and standardize DoD Component personnel recovery-related activities and
ensure such is reflected in their respective personnel recovery-related doctrine, organization,
training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, and facilities processes.

    b. In coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the USD(P), report to
the Secretary of Defense on personnel recovery operations and initiatives. Periodically review
personnel recovery employment concepts and capabilities, identify policy ramifications to the
USD(P) through the USD(P) CoS and DASD(POW/MPA), and recommend improvements to the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

    c. Provide training and education for commanders, forces, and individuals on joint personnel
recovery activities.

       (1) Develop and conduct education and training courses.

       (2) Conduct specialized individual training.

       (3) In coordination with the USD(P) and DASD(POW/MPA), the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Combatant Commanders, and Secretaries of the Military Departments, assist
other U.S. Government departments and agencies, partner nations, and others, as directed by the
President or the Secretary of Defense with PR-related education and training programs.

   d. Assess joint SERE training.

       (1) Advise the DoD Components on their compliance with minimum joint training
standards in accordance with DoD issuances.

       (2) Evaluate and assess joint PR curriculum developed by, or for, the DoD Components.

        (3) Establish and assess joint PR standards in collaboration with the DoD Components
for formal joint PR training, including code of conduct, SERE, and specialized SERE training.

   e. Provide joint personnel recovery analytical support.

       (1) Sponsor and coordinate development of personnel recovery requirements, focusing
on capabilities and effects. Advocate personnel recovery requirements in the JCIDS process and
monitor implementation.

       (2) Review personnel recovery process, training, and equipment standards, in
coordination with the Military Departments and USSOCOM, to promote interoperability.



                                                17
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


       (3) Using joint concept development and experimentation, facilitate the development of
personnel recovery capabilities that meet Combatant Command requirements.

   f. Conduct technology research and integration. Develop, facilitate, assess, and oversee
DoD personnel recovery technologies; joint experiments; and tactics, techniques, and
procedures. The goal is to meet Combatant Command requirements that the Military
Department component programs do not address or as designated by OSD or the Joint Staff.
Conduct specialized research, development, testing, and evaluation, as applicable.

   g. Maintain databases and archives.

       (1) Maintain a historical record of personnel recovery events, activities, and operations.

        (2) Establish and maintain a personnel recovery reference library and an accessible
repository for archived historical personnel recovery data to provide accurate, thorough, and
objective accounts of circumstances surrounding the isolation of DoD personnel.

       (3) Provide the interagency and partner nations appropriate access to personnel recovery
information in support of personnel recovery planning, training, research, and rehearsals.

   h. Develop lessons learned.

        (1) In collaboration with the Heads of the DoD Components, establish and maintain a
personnel recovery lessons learned program. The purpose of the program shall be to analyze,
validate, and catalog personnel recovery findings and observations derived from debriefings of
isolated personnel, recovery forces, and commanders and staffs who accomplish operational
planning.

       (2) Assist the DoD Components with the collection, validation, and advocacy of
personnel recovery requirements and facilitate implementation of corrective actions.

        (3) Develop and manage a capability to share appropriate lessons learned with
interagency and partner nations.

        (4) Establish procedures to make operational records, intelligence, and documentation of
missing DoD personnel available to Military Departments, personnel responsible for the post-
hostility personnel accounting mission, and DASD(POW/MPA) personnel accounting analysts.

   i. In coordination with the Joint Staff, coordinate Combatant Command NAR requirements
and disburse NAR funds. Develop and coordinate NAR funding and fiscal reporting procedures
with OSD, Combatant Commands, and other U.S. Government departments and agencies.

   j. Assume primary responsibility for PR intelligence production (formerly accomplished by
United States Joint Forces Command /Joint Intelligence and Operations Center) in collaboration
with the Combatant Commands in accordance with Reference (m).



                                               18
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


   k. Develop and manage the DoD SERE Psychology Program to provide the Military
Departments and the Combatant Commands with clinical psychologists who are SERE- and
CoC-trained.

    l. Monitor joint and combined exercises, planning processes, and joint training systems for
integration of PR requirements and objectives into each. As requested, assist the DoD
Components with developing, managing, planning, and assessing PR scenarios and exercises,
including those for joint force commanders and staff. Support the Director, Joint Staff J-7
exercise program throughout the joint exercise life cycle.

    m. Upon formal coordination with the USD(P) (through the USD(P) CoS and
DASD(POW/MPA)), Secretaries of the Military Departments, and affected Combatant
Commanders, publish Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff guidance to implement approved
policy or agreed upon tactics, techniques, and procedures. Such guidance shall be incorporated
by the Military Departments and Combatant Commands in the execution of their responsibilities
as assigned in this Directive.

    n. Coordinate and distribute joint standards and procedures pertaining to the reintegration of
isolated personnel in accordance with Reference (r). Monitor reintegration procedures and
provide subject matter expert advice, assistance, and instruction to the responsible Combatant
Commander and Military Department, as required.

   o. Identify, document, validate, prioritize, and submit resource requirements and POM
inputs for JPRA to the DJS for approval and forwarding to the Secretary of the Air Force,
keeping DASD(POW/MPA) informed. Address JPRA’s manpower requirements with the
Secretaries of the Military Departments.

    p. Publish and distribute personnel recovery products to the DoD Components to assist in
joint training and mission planning. These include, but are not limited to, evasion charts and
isolated personnel guidance. Provide operational support to the DoD Components for evasion
planning and the use of personnel recovery products and evasion aids. Manage the DoD Blood
Chit program in accordance with Reference (g).

    q. Maintain responsibility for specialized personnel recovery training, operational support,
intelligence requirements, and associated programs in support of special mission units.

    r. Develop, evaluate, and maintain joint personnel recovery doctrine, including joint tactics,
techniques, and procedures in coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Secretaries of the Military Departments, Combatant Commanders, and CDRUSSOCOM.

       (1) Assist in developing and coordinating NATO doctrine and other NATO operational
publications to distribute personnel recovery guidance and encourage synchronization with U.S.
personnel recovery doctrine.

       (2) Assist other U.S. Government departments and agencies in developing personnel
recovery guidelines that are compatible with DoD personnel recovery doctrine.

                                                19
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009



   s. Serve as the original classification authority for PR information.

   t. Serve as the PR OPR for the Joint Staff.




                                                 20
Change 2, 05/24/2017                                                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


                                        GLOSSARY

                       PART 1. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 AOR                     area of responsibility
 ASD(A&PSA)              Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Security
 ASD(ISA)                Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
 ASD(HD&GS)              Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
                         Security
 ATSD(PA)                Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
 ASD(SO/LIC)             Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low
                         Intensity Conflict

 C4ISR                   command, control, communications, computers, intelligence,
                         surveillance, and reconnaissance
 CDF                     contractors deploying with the force
 CDRUSSOCOM              Commander, United States Special Operations Command
 CoC                     Code of Conduct
 COM                     Chief of Mission
 CoS                     Chief of Staff

 DASD(POW/MPA)           Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Prisoner of War/Missing
                         Personnel Affairs
 DCAPE                   Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
 DoD CIO                 DoD Chief Information Officer
 DoDD                    Department of Defense directive
 DoDI                    Department of Defense instruction
 DRRS                    Defense Readiness Reporting System

 GC DoD                  General Counsel of the Department of Defense

 IG DoD                  Inspector General of the Department of Defense

 JCIDS                   Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System
 J-7                     Joint Force Development Directorate
 JPRA                    Joint Personnel Recovery Agency

 MOU                     memorandum of understanding

 NATO                    North Atlantic Treaty Organization
 NSS CSG                 National Security Staff Counterterrorism Security Group

 OPR                     office of primary responsibility

 PA                      public affairs
 PPBES                   Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution System



Change 2, 05/24/2017                          21                          GLOSSARY
                                                                       DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


 PSA                        Principal Staff Assistant

 SAR                        search and rescue
 SERE                       survival, evasion, resistance, and escape

 USD(AT&L)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
                            Logistics
 USD(C)/CFO                 Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                            Department of Defense
 USD(I)                     Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
 USD(P)                     Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
 USD(P&R)                   Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
 USSOCOM                    United States Special Operations Command


                                      PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

contingency contractor personnel. Defense contractors and employees of defense contractors and
associated subcontractors, including U.S. citizens, U.S. legal aliens, third country nationals, and
citizens of host nations who are authorized to accompany U.S. military forces in contingency
operations or other military operations, or exercises designated by the geographic Combatant
Commander. This includes employees of external support, systems support, and theater support
contractors. Such personnel are provided with an appropriate identification card under the Geneva
Conventions.

CDF. A sub-category of contingency contractor personnel. CDF are employees of system support
and external support contractors, and associated subcontractors, at all tiers, who are specifically
authorized in their contract to deploy through a deployment center or process and provide support to
U.S. military forces in contingency operations or in other military operations, or exercises designated
by a geographic Combatant Commander. CDF includes forward-deployed system support and
external support contractors designated to remain in place in theater when a contingency is declared.
Such personnel are provided with an appropriate identification card under the Geneva Conventions.
CDF usually work for the U.S. military forces under a deployable contract agreement in peacetime,
and in many cases have a long-term relationship with a specific unit. They usually live with and
provide services directly to U.S. military forces and receive Government-furnished support similar to
DoD civilians. CDF do not include third country nationals or local national personnel hired in
theater using local procurement (e.g., day laborers).

Defense contractor. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other legal non-
Federal entity that enters into a contract directly with the Department of Defense to furnish services,
supplies, or construction. For purposes of this Directive, foreign governments, representatives of
foreign governments, or foreign corporations wholly owned by foreign governments that have
entered into contracts with the Department of Defense are not Defense contractors.




Change 2, 05/24/2017                              22                            GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDD 3002.01, April 16, 2009


isolated personnel. U.S. military, DoD civilians and contractor personnel (and others designated
by the President or Secretary of Defense) who are separated from their unit (as an individual or a
group) while participating in a U.S. sponsored military activity or mission and are, or may be, in
a situation where they must survive, evade, resist, or escape.

personnel recovery. The sum of military, diplomatic, and civil efforts to prepare for and execute
the recovery and reintegration of isolated personnel.




Change 2, 05/24/2017                            23                         GLOSSARY
