                                 Department of Defense

                                  DIRECTIVE
                                                                                 NUMBER 5535.4
                                                                                  August 31, 1984
                                                              Certified Current as of November 21, 2003




                                                            Incorporating Change 1, November 16, 1994
                                                                                            GC, DoD
SUBJECT: Copyrighted Sound and Video Recordings


1. PURPOSE

This Directive provides policy, prescribes procedures, and assigns responsibilities regarding the
use of copyrighted sound and video recordings within the Department of Defense.


2. APPLICABILITY

     2.1. This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments, the Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Unified and Specified Commands,
and the Defense Agencies (hereafter referred to collectively as "DoD Components").

     2.2. This Directive does not regulate the procurement or use of copyrighted works for
authorized official purposes.


3. POLICY

     3.1. It is DoD policy:

           3.1.1. To recognize the rights of copyright owners by establishing specific guidelines
for the use of copyrighted works by individuals within the DoD community, consistent with the
Department's unique mission and worldwide commitments.

          3.1.2. Not to condone, facilitate, or permit unlicensed public performance or unlawful
reproduction for private or personal use of copyrighted sound or video recordings, using
Government appropriated- or nonappropriated-fund-owned or -leased equipment or facilities.
                                                                     DoDD 5535.4, August 31, 1984


     3.2. Although the policy expressed in this Directive takes into account the copyright law of
the United States, the application of that law to specific situations is a matter for interpretation by
the U.S. Copyright Office and the Department of Justice.


4. PROCEDURES

     4.1. Permission or licenses from copyright owners shall be obtained for public
performances of copyrighted sound and video recordings.

     4.2. DoD Component procedures established pursuant to section 5., below provide
guidance for determining whether a performance is "public." These general principles will be
observed:

         4.2.1. A performance in a residential facility or a physical extension thereof is not
considered a public performance.

         4.2.2. A performance in an isolated area or deployed unit is not considered a public
performance.

          4.2.3. Any performance at which admission is charged normally would be considered
a public performance.

     4.3. Government audio and video duplicating equipment and appropriated funded playback
equipment may not be used for reproduction of copyrighted sound or video recordings.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

The Heads of DoD Components shall establish procedures to comply with this Directive and
shall provide necessary local guidance and legal interpretation.




                                                  2
                                                          DoDD 5535.4, August 31, 1984


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.



7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




                                           3
