                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 5160.41E
                                                                                August 21, 2015
                                              Incorporating Change 2, Effective August 25, 2020

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Defense Language, Regional Expertise, and Culture (LREC) Program

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5160.41E (Reference (a)) to establish Defense LREC
Program policy and assign responsibilities.

   b. Incorporates language, regional expertise, and culture as elements of the Defense LREC
Program.

    c. Provides guidance for the biennial Capabilities Based Review (CBR) and development,
distribution, and update of the DoD Strategic Language List (SLL).

   d. Designates the Secretary of the Army as the DoD Executive Agent (EA) for both the
Defense Language Institute Foreign Language Center (DLIFLC) and the Contract Linguist
Program in accordance with DoDD 5101.1 (Reference (b)).

    e. Designates the Secretary of the Air Force as the DoD EA for the Defense Language
Institute English Language Center (DLIELC) in accordance with Reference (b).

    f. Establishes the Defense Language Steering Committee (DLSC) and updates members’
responsibilities.

   g. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for governing the foreign area officer
(FAO) programs.


2. APPLICABILITY

    a. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the Coast Guard at all
times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security by agreement with
that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint
                                                                 DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015

Staff, the Combatant Commands (CCMDs), the Office of Inspector General of the Department of
Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
within the DoD (referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).

    b. Nothing in this directive will inhibit the roles and responsibilities of the Inspector General
of the Department of Defense in accordance with Appendix to Title 5, United States Code (also
known as the “Inspector General Act of 1978”) (Reference (c)).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. Foreign language skills, regional expertise, and cultural capabilities are enduring critical
competencies essential to the DoD mission and must be managed to maximize the accession,
development, sustainment, enhancement, and employment of these critical skills to the DoD
mission.

       (1) All DoD personnel will be screened upon entering federal service for foreign
language proficiency.

      (2) The study, maintenance, and employment of proficiency in critical languages by
DoD personnel are encouraged with monetary and non-monetary incentives such as:

            (a) The Secretaries of the Military Departments may pay a foreign language
proficiency bonus to their active duty and Reserve Component members who are certified
proficient in a foreign language, in accordance with DoD Instruction 1340.27 (Reference (d)).

          (b) The Secretaries of the Military Departments may pay a Senior Reserve Officers
Training Corps foreign language skill proficiency bonus for cadets and midshipmen, in
accordance with Reference (d).

           (c) Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel System foreign language pay for civilian
personnel performing intelligence duties who are certified proficient in a foreign language, in
accordance with Volume 2016 of DoD Instruction 1400.25 (Reference (e)).

            (d) Other defense civilian personnel performing non-intelligence duties requiring
proficiency in foreign languages identified as necessary for national security interest may be
eligible for foreign language pay in accordance with Volume 8 of the DoD Financial
Management Regulations (Reference (f)).

           (e) The Secretaries of the Military Departments may authorize time for self-managed
and classroom facilitated skill maintenance and enhancement of language skills in continuing
education programs such as DoD Language Training Centers and the Reserve Officers’ Training
Corps Language Flagship and Project Global Officer, in accordance with section 529 of Public
Law 111-84 (Reference (g)) and section 535 of Public Law 109-163 (Reference (h)), or access to
technology-based language maintenance and enhancement products and tools.




Change 2, 08/25/2020                              2
                                                                DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015

        (3) Military and DoD civilian personnel deploying to foreign territories must possess or
have access to an appropriate capability to communicate in the languages of the territories of
deployment and at least have a rudimentary understanding of the region and associated
culture(s).

       (4) As mission dictates, the DoD will make full use of available language proficiency,
regional expertise, and cultural capabilities without regard to Service or DoD agency affiliation,
consistent with law and DoD policy.

       (5) Centralized oversight of human language technology (HLT) and other automated
language translation tools system research, development, and acquisition will promote a coherent
DoD-wide program advancing cross language communication to avoid duplication.

        (6) The DLSC will recommend initiatives to improve language proficiency, regional
expertise, and cultural capability development across the DoD. Both military and select civilian
personnel receive region and culture education and training to meet mission requirements.

        (7) The implementation of the policies and procedures in this directive ensures the
protection of an individual’s privacy in the collection, use, maintenance, and distribution of
personally identifiable information as required by DoDD 5400.11(Reference (i)) and DoD
5400.11-R (Reference (j)).

    b. The DoD will support partner nation security force efforts to increase their proficiency in
the English language to facilitate communication.

   c. To provide this capability, the Military Departments must maintain a corps of FAOs who:

      (1) Have foreign language proficiency.

      (2) Are regionally focused experts.

      (3) Are culturally aware to meet DoD needs.

      (4) Can accomplish the goals of the National Defense Strategy.

    d. The Military Departments will develop and maintain FAOs with the necessary LREC
abilities in their assigned region to meet the Department’s needs and goals as established in the
DoD Strategy. The Departments will ensure that FAOs are qualified to guarantee the
professionalism and continuity of force.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.



Change 2, 08/25/2020                             3
                                                             DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015

6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change:

    a. Incorporates policies from DoDD 1315.17 (Reference (k)) for the FAO program to reduce
the overall administrative burden and number of DoDDs that govern the FAO community.

   b. Establishes the responsibilities of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness (USD(P&R)), the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and relevant OSD and DoD
Components governing the FAO program.

   c. Updates references and addresses other administrative concerns.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective August 21, 2015.




                                               Robert O. Work
                                               Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. DLSC Organization
Glossary




Change 2, 08/25/2020                          4
                                                                DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


                                            ENCLOSURE 1

                                            REFERENCES


(a)      DoD Directive 5160.41E, “Defense Language Program,” October 21, 2005, as amended
           (hereby cancelled)
(b)      DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(c)      United States Code, Title 5 (Appendix also known as the “Inspector General Act of 1978”)
(d)      DoD Instruction 1340.27, “Military Foreign Language Skill Proficiency Bonuses,” May 21,
           2013
(e)      DoD Instruction 1400.25, Volume 2016, “DoD Civilian Personnel Management System:
           Administration of Foreign Language Pay for Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel
           System (DCIPS) Employees,” April 28, 2015
(f)      DoD 7000.14-R, Volume 8, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulations
           (FMRs): Civilian Pay Policy,” current edition
(g)      Section 529 of Public Law 111-84, “The National Defense Authorization Act for FY
           2010,” October 28, 2009
(h)      Section 535 of Public Law 109-163, “The National Defense Authorization Act for FY
           2006,” January 6, 2006
(i)      DoD Instruction 5400.11, “DoD Privacy and Civil Liberties Programs,” January 29, 2019
(j)      DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(k)      DoD Directive 1315.17, “Military Department Foreign Area Officer (FAO) Programs,”
           April 28, 2005
(l)      DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
           (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(m)      Federal Government Interagency Language Roundtable (ILR) Skill Level Descriptions 1
(n)      DoD Instruction 5160.70, “Management of the Defense Language, Regional Expertise, and
           Culture (LREC) Program,” December 30, 2016
(o)      DoD Instruction 1315.20, “Management of Department of Defense (DoD) Foreign Area
           Officer (FAO) Programs,” September 28, 2007




1
    Available at https://www.govtilr.org/


Change 2, 08/25/2020                             5                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R):

   a. Provides overall policy guidance for the Defense LREC Program.

    b. Consults with the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (USD(R&E))
and the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment (USD(A&S)) on multi-
language technology efforts.

   c. Consistent with Reference (b), serves as the OSD Principal Staff Assistant for and
oversees:

       (1) The Secretary of the Army as the DoD EA for DLIFLC and the DoD EA for the
Contract Linguist Program.

       (2) The Secretary of the Air Force as the DoD EA for the DLIELC.

   d. Oversees the DLSC. Designates a general officer or flag officer (GO/FO) or Senior
Executive Service (SES) member in writing to serve as the DoD Senior Language Authority
(SLA) and chair of the DLSC.

    e. Conducts biennial CBR in coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments,
the CJCS, the USD(A&S), USD(R&E), the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), the
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)), and select Defense
Agencies (listed in section 7 of this enclosure) to identify DoD language capability needs based
on national security strategy. Reviews plans for addressing resource needs to meet DoD language
capabilities. Provides results from this review to inform the development of the DoD SLL.

   f. Develops and maintains personnel systems with accurate data on all DoD personnel with
formally assessed and self-reported foreign language proficiency, regional expertise, and cultural
capabilities. Classified personnel data will be maintained in a classified system.

   g. Develops and publishes a DoD SLL and updates it as required, in coordination with the
USD(P), the USD(I&S), the CJCS, the Combatant Commanders, and the Secretaries of the
Military Departments.

   h. Manages and oversees the DoD Language Readiness Index to track foreign language
capabilities and requirements.

  i. Establishes, in coordination with the CJCS, accession, education, and utilization policy for
FAOs, and oversees the Military Departments’ FAO programs.




Change 2, 08/25/2020                            6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


2. USD(A&S). The USD(A&S):

   a. Designates a representative as defined in the Glossary to serve on the DLSC.

   b. Oversees research, development, and acquisition of multi-language technology to be
employed with the operating forces and coordinates these efforts with the USD(P&R) and the
USD(I&S).

   c. Consults with the USD(P&R), the USD(I&S), the CJCS, the Secretaries of the Military
Departments, and the directors of the Defense Agencies to identify HLT needs. Guides research,
development, and acquisition of automated language translation system capabilities.

    d. Oversees development of HLT and other automated language translation tools system
research, development, and acquisition to promote a coherent DoD-wide program that advances
cross language communication and avoids duplication.


3. USD(R&E). The USD(R&E):

   a. Designates a representative as defined in the Glossary to serve on the DLSC.

    b. Oversees research, development, testing, and evaluation of multi-language technology to
be employed with the operating forces and coordinates these efforts with the USD(P&R) and the
USD(I&S).

   c. Consults with the USD(P&R), the USD(I&S), the CJCS, the Secretaries of the Military
Departments, and the directors of the Defense Agencies to identify HLT needs. Guides research,
development of automated language translation system capabilities.


4. USD(P). The USD(P):

   a. Designates a representative, as defined in the Glossary, to serve on the DLSC.

   b. Provides, in coordination with the USD(P&R), the USD(I&S), the CJCS, and the
Secretaries of the Military Departments, national security strategy advice to the CBRs and
updates of the DoD SLL, and the Military Departments’ FAO programs.


5. USD(I&S). The USD(I&S):

   a. Designates a representative as defined in the Glossary to serve on the DLSC.

    b. Exercises policy oversight of personnel in defense intelligence positions to ensure that
DoD intelligence, counterintelligence, and security components possess the necessary foreign
language proficiencies (to include the oversight of FAO needs and capabilities) in support of



Change 2, 08/25/2020                            7                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


intelligence mission requirements, in coordination with representatives from the Secretaries of the
Military Departments and the directors of the defense intelligence combat support agencies.

    c. Oversees and coordinates with the USD(R&E) and USD(A&S) on research, development,
testing, evaluation, and acquisition of HLT to be employed within the Defense Intelligence
Components.


6. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). The USD(C)/CFO designates a representative
as defined in the Glossary to serve on the DLSC.


7. DIRECTOR, COST ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAM EVALUATION (DCAPE). The
DCAPE:

   a. Designates a representative as defined in the Glossary to serve on the DLSC.

   b. Maintains separate OSD program elements (PEs) for DLIFLC and for DLIELC.


8. DIRECTORS OF THE DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA), NATIONAL
GEOSPATIAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (NGA), DEFENSE THREAT REDUCTION
AGENCY (DTRA), AND DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION AGENCY (DSCA), AND
DIRECTOR, NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY/CHIEF, CENTRAL SECURITY SERVICE
(DIRNSA/CHCSS).

    a. The Defense Agency directors in this section are under the authority, direction, and control
of the following OSD Component heads:

       (1) USD(I&S). The Directors of DIA and NGA, and DIRNSA/CHCSS.

       (2) USD(A&S). Director, DTRA.

       (3) USD(P). Director, DSCA.

   b. The Directors of DIA, NGA, DTRA, and DSCA and the DIRNSA/CHCSS:

       (1) Designate an individual to serve as an SLA as defined in the Glossary.

       (2) Build, train, and maintain an appropriate level of foreign language qualified civilian
personnel as well as personnel with the requisite levels of regional expertise and cultural
capabilities.

       (3) Screen their civilian personnel upon entering federal service and periodically for
foreign language capabilities and forward results to the appropriate personnel system.



Change 2, 08/25/2020                            8                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


        (4) Establish technical requirements for appropriate levels of foreign language
proficiency, regional expertise, and cultural capabilities and specialized training programs to meet
mission requirements.

       (5) Develop an agency-specific program to provide both military and select civilian
personnel with regional and cultural training to better understand the global environment in which
the DoD operates and improve their ability to successfully work with international partners.
These programs will not replace or employ programmed and appropriated funds for developing
foreign language capabilities.

       (6) Determine requirements and research, develop, test, evaluate, acquire, and integrate
HLT tools that support multi-discipline collection, analysis, and production. Provide HLT usage
and developments to oversight organizations as appropriate.

       (7) Oversee the utilization, sustainment, training, and professional development of FAOs
assigned to their respective Defense Agencies.


9. DOD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads shall support the utilization,
sustainment, training, and professional development of FAOs assigned to their respective
components.


10. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In addition to the responsibilities
in section 9 of this enclosure, the Secretaries of the Military Departments:

    a. Designate an individual to serve as an SLA as defined in the Glossary. The Secretary of
the Navy designates one individual each from the Navy and Marine Corps.

    b. Organize, train, and equip the force to meet operational requirements for language
proficiency, regional expertise, and cultural capabilities.

    c. Screen all military personnel, as required, upon entering federal service and periodically
for foreign language proficiency, aptitude, and regional expertise and forward results to the
appropriate personnel system.

    d. Monitor the organization’s accession, retention, attrition, and promotion of language
professionals to identify trends or anomalies.

   e. Set language, regional, and cultural standards for leaders of deploying units and staffs
supporting deployments to ensure all personnel that deploy to overseas regions receive training to
meet their mission responsibilities.

    f. Develop, resource, and sustain a FAO program designed to recruit, develop, retain,
motivate, assess, and promote a cadre of officers with the necessary language proficiencies,
regional expertise, and cultural knowledge, as defined in the Reference (o), to facilitate close and



Change 2, 08/25/2020                             9                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


continuous military, political, cultural, societal, economic, and geographic relationships with
foreign governments.

    g. Develop a Service-specific program to provide military and select civilian personnel with
regional and cultural training to meet mission requirements.

    h. Build relevant career models for officer and enlisted personnel that lead to greater retention
by personnel with foreign language proficiency, regional expertise, and cultural capabilities to
meet mission requirements.

     i. Ensure that all foreign language, regional, and cultural education and training of personnel
is tracked and documented in Service personnel and training systems and made available to the
Defense Readiness Reporting System.

   j. Comply with collective bargaining obligations as applicable.

    k. Determine requirements and research, develop, test, evaluate, acquire, and integrate HLT
tools that support multi-discipline collection, analysis, and intelligence production. In
coordination with the USD(P&R), the USD(R&E), and the USD(A&S) collaborate between the
Military Services and other government agencies as appropriate to ensure common data standards
and avoid duplication of effort.

    l. Oversee the utilization, sustainment, training, and professional development of FAOs
assigned to their respective components.


11. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. In addition to the responsibilities in sections 9 and 10 of
this enclosure, the Secretary of the Army:

   a. In his or her capacity as the DoD EA for DLIFLC:

       (1) Plans, programs, budgets, funds, and executes resources to meet the DoD mission
requirements of DLIFLC in coordination with the DoD SLA. Coordinates with the DoD SLA, the
USD(I&S) (as resource sponsor for Military Intelligence Program (MIP)/National Intelligence
Program (NIP)), the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and USD(P&R) before modifying
DLIFLC funding or resources. Maintains a PE to program for and accounts for execution of
resources for DLIFLC.

       (2) Nominates the Commandant, DLIFLC, to the USD(P&R) for approval before
assignment.

       (3) Performs as the lead Military Department for the Joint FAO orientation course.

   b. In his or her capacity as the DoD EA for the Contract Linguist Program:




Change 2, 08/25/2020                             10                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


       (1) Oversees all contracts established specifically for contract linguist foreign language
support provided to the DoD Components except for combat support agencies and United States
Special Operations Command.

       (2) Executes policy and procedures and validates contract linguist support requirements,
including the resourcing of such requirements and oversight of program and funding execution.

        (3) Documents all contracts relevant to contract linguist management, and the contract
linguist enterprise data base.

     (4) May grant other exceptions for direct contracting of language services under
memorandums of agreement consistent with law and DoD regulations.

       (5) Establishes procedures for the DoD Components to submit requests for contract
language support.

         (6) Ensures that DoD policies for counterintelligence and security screening are followed
for all language services contracted.


12. SECRETARY OF THE NAVY.

   a. In addition to the responsibilities in sections 9 and 10 of this enclosure, the Secretary of the
Navy:

       (1) Serves as the lead agent for the Regional Skills Sustainment Program training
program.

       (2) Administers and coordinates the Regional Skills Sustainment Program to include
guidance on topics, reviews and approval of course design, curriculum and presenters, course
evaluation reviews.

   b. The Secretary of the Navy is not responsible for the funding or logistical obligation of the
Regional Skills Sustainment Program.


13. SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. In addition to the responsibilities in sections 9 and 10
of this enclosure and in his or her capacity as the DoD EA for the DLIELC, the Secretary of the
Air Force:

   a. Plans, programs, budgets, funds, and executes resources to meet the DoD mission
requirements of DLIELC in coordination with the DoD SLA. Coordinates with the DoD SLA,
USD(I&S) (as resource sponsor for MIP/NIP), the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and
USD(P&R) before modifying DLIELC funding or resources. Maintains a PE to program for and
accounts for execution of resources for DLIELC.




Change 2, 08/25/2020                             11                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


   b. Nominates an individual to serve as the Commandant, DLIELC, for USD(P&R) approval
before assignment.


14. CJCS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, the CJCS:

   a. Designates an individual to serve as an SLA as defined in the Glossary.

   b. Develops employment doctrine and oversees a planning process to ensure the
consideration of foreign language proficiency, regional expertise, and cultural capability
requirements in operational and contingency plans.

    c. Provides planning guidance to the Combatant Commanders to enable consideration of
foreign language proficiency, regional expertise, and cultural capability requirements in
operational planning.

   d. Recommends to the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the USD(P&R), the
USD(I&S), and the USD(P), ways to make full use of available capabilities during times of
operational necessity without regard to Service or DoD agency affiliation.

    e. Screens all civilian personnel under his or her cognizance upon entering federal service and
periodically for foreign language, regional expertise, and cultural capability, and forwards results
to the appropriate personnel system.

   f. Develops a staff-specific program to provide select civilian personnel with culture training.


15. COMBATANT COMMANDERS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this
enclosure, the Combatant Commanders:

   a. Designate an individual to serve as an SLA as defined in the Glossary.

    b. Dedicate sufficient support staff for the SLA to identify language, regional expertise, and
cultural requirements and address related issues.

    c. Incorporate language requirements into operational and contingency plans. Plans will
include the capacity to surge foreign language proficiency, regional expertise, and cultural
capabilities beyond organic capabilities as appropriate.

    d. Screen their civilian personnel upon entering federal service and periodically for foreign
language skills and forward results to the appropriate personnel system.

    e. Determine the appropriate foreign language, regional expertise, and cultural capabilities
requirements, based on the current situation and circumstances, for personnel deploying to their
area of responsibility.




Change 2, 08/25/2020                            12                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                    DLSC ORGANIZATION


1. DLSC MEMBERSHIP. The DLSC:

   a. Consists of:

     (1) GO/FO or SES (or equivalent) representatives from the Offices of the USD(P),
USD(I&S), USD(C)/CFO, USD(R&E), USD(A&S), and DCAPE.

       (2) SLAs from the CCMDs, Joint Staff, the Military Departments, DIA, DSCA, DTRA,
National Security Agency/Central Security Service (NSA/CSS), and NGA.

   b. Is chaired by the DoD SLA.


2. DLSC PURPOSE. The DLSC:

   a. Advises and recommends to the USD(P&R) policy and initiatives to improve the full
spectrum of foreign language proficiency, regional expertise, and cultural capability
development across the DoD.

    b. Meets quarterly or when directed by the DoD SLA. Sets a formal agenda that coordinates
recommended changes and updates to policies affecting DoD foreign language, regional
expertise, and cultural capabilities.

    c. Reviews and provides recommendations on present and emerging foreign language,
regional expertise, and cultural capability needs for DoD personnel.

   d. Reviews and provides recommendations to USD(P&R) on foreign language, regional
expertise, and cultural capability training, education, personnel, and financial requirements.

   e. Serves as an advisory board to the USD(P&R) for the DLIFLC and the DLIELC.


3. COMMANDANT OF DLIFLC. The Commandant of DLIFLC:

    a. Executes standardization, testing, research and development, and evaluation of foreign
language training, education, and related services for language professionals and general purpose
forces within the DoD.

   b. Exercises direct liaison authority with the DoD SLA and the Defense Language and
National Security Education Office (DLNSEO).




Change 2, 08/25/2020                            13                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


    c. Staffs requests for support and resource requirements and issues through the DoD EA of
the DLIFLC to the USD(P&R).

   d. Staffs resource requirements involving MIP/NIP through the USD(I&S).

   e. Serves as technical advisor to the DLSC.


4. COMMANDANT OF DLIELC. The Commandant of DLIELC:

    a. Executes the standardization, testing, research and development, and evaluation of English
language training, education, and related services within the DoD.

   b. Meets English language, regional expertise, cultural education, and operational training
needs of the DoD.

   c. Provides operational services and management oversight of grant-in-aid international
English language programs conducted under security assistance.

   d. Exercises direct liaison authority with the DoD SLA and the DLNSEO.

   e. Staffs requests for support and resource requirements and issues through the DoD EA of
DLIELC to the USD(P&R).

   f. Serves as technical advisor to the DLSC.




Change 2, 08/25/2020                             14                             ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


                                          GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 CBR               capabilities based review
 CCMD              Combatant Command
 CJCS              Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


 DCAPE             Director Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
 DIA               Defense Intelligence Agency
 DIRNSA/CHCSS      Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
 DLIELC            Defense Language Institute English Language Center
 DLIFLC            Defense Language Institute Foreign Language Center
 DLNSEO            Defense Language and National Security Education Office
 DLSC              Defense Language Steering Committee
 DoDD              DoD directive
 DSCA              Defense Security Cooperation Agency
 DTRA              Defense Threat Reduction Agency


 EA                Executive Agent


 FAO               foreign area officer


 GO/FO             general officer or flag officer


 HLT               human language technology


 LREC              language, regional expertise, and culture


 MIP               Military Intelligence Program


 NGA               National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
 NIP               National Intelligence Program
 NSA/CSS           National Security Agency/Central Security Services


 PE                program element



Change 2, 08/25/2020                          15                                 GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


 SES                  Senior Executive Service
 SLA                  senior language authority
 SLL                  Strategic Language List


 USD(A&S)             Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
 USD(C)/CFO           Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                      Department of Defense
 USD(I&S)             Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
 USD(P)               Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
 USD(P&R)             Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
 USD(R&E)             Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this directive.

contract linguist. A person hired to fill any contract position primarily because of their ability to
listen, read, speak, or write in a foreign language, except those hired specifically to conduct
foreign language instruction.

cultural capabilities. The skills and knowledge that enable personnel to adapt and function
effectively in any culture to achieve mission success. Includes culture-general capabilities that
promote effective development and use of regional expertise.

Defense Intelligence Components. All DoD organizations that perform National Intelligence,
Defense Intelligence, and intelligence-related functions, including: the DIA, the NGA, the
National Reconnaissance Office, the NSA/CSS, and the intelligence elements of the Active and
Reserve Components of the Military Departments, including the United States Coast Guard
when operating as a service in the Department of the Navy. The offices and staffs of the senior
intelligence officers of the CCMD Headquarters are designated as Defense Intelligence
Components in accordance with DoDD 5143.01 (Reference (l)).

DoD Language Readiness Index. A strategic, near real-time web-based tool that enables the
management of DoD language and available regional expertise capabilities and requirements for
DoD. It captures and compares language capabilities against requirements to identify the gaps in
the Total Force that allows senior leaders to make informed decisions, develop risk assessments,
mitigation measures, and shape the future force.

DoD personnel. All military (Active Component and Reserve Component) members and DoD
civilian employees.

DoD SLA. A GO/FO or SES member appointed in writing by the USD(P&R) to chair the
DLSC.


Change 2, 08/25/2020                              16                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


FAO. A commissioned officer from any of the six armed forces (Army, Navy, Air Force,
Marine Corps, Space Force, and Coast Guard) who is a regionally focused expert in political-
military operations. Such officers possess a unique combination of strategic focus and regional
expertise, with political, cultural, sociological, economic, and geographic awareness. Foreign
language proficiency is required in at least one of the dominant languages in their specified
region.

HLT. A range of technologies that process human natural language data in a variety of ways to
address the needs of human analysts and translators or for other computer applications.
Examples include but are not limited to: optical character recognition; speech recognition to take
audio input and convert it to written language; foreign language dictionaries for specialized
strategic areas; machine translation for critical foreign languages with few or no human
translators; and information extraction (e.g., identifying foreign names, places, and
organizations).

language aptitude. A test-based prediction of how well an individual can learn a foreign
language in a given amount of time and under given conditions.

language professional. A person who is certified in a foreign language proficiency of at least
skill level 2 (as identified in the Federal Government Interagency Language Roundtable Skill
Level Descriptions (Reference (m)) in two of the three modalities (listening, reading, and
speaking) in one or more foreign languages, and who requires that foreign language to perform
his or her primary function.

language proficiency. The continuum–from memorized proficiency to functionally native
proficiency–that describes the ability of an individual to function in the reading, listening, and
speaking modalities of a foreign language as assessed by the U.S. Government Interagency
Language Roundtable proficiency rating scale.

Lead Military Department. The Military Department designated in this directive with specific
responsibilities and functions to provide defined levels of support for operational missions, or
administrative or other designated activities that involve two or more DoD Components.

regional expertise. Knowledge about a specific region of the world that focuses on but is not
limited to the political, historical, cultural, sociological, economic, and geographic factors of that
region.

regional proficiency. The continuum—from pre-novice to expert—of knowledge and
application thereof with regard to a defined region of the world, including but not limited to the
political, historical, cultural, sociological, economic, and geographic factors (as outlined by the
Regional Proficiency guidelines in DoD Instruction 5160.70 (Reference (m)).




Change 2, 08/25/2020                             17                                     GLOSSARY
                                                               DoDD 5160.41E, August 21, 2015


representative. A GO/FO or SES member who represents their Component at DLSC meetings.
The representative must have direct access to their Component’s senior leadership; understand
the force-wide programmatic and policy implications of the Defense LREC Program; and
articulate, advocate, and defend their Component equities as they pertain to force-wide policy
and resourcing activities.

screened. The process to document a member’s capabilities in foreign language, regional
proficiency, and culture, as an official part of a military or civilian personnel record.

SLA. An individual at the GO/FO, SES, or equivalent level designated in writing by the head of
the Military Departments, Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, CCMDs, and Defense Agencies to
represent their organization’s equities in the Defense LREC Program and participate in the
DLSC. The SLA must have direct access to their component’s senior leadership and understand
the joint capabilities in foreign language, regional, and culture capability needs of his or her
component. SLAs are responsible for drafting, coordinating, and executing their organizations’
language, regional expertise, and culture capability strategic plans and for overseeing capability
allocation and utilization policies within their component.

SLL. The list of languages that present the greatest utility toward achieving U.S. national
security interests, near and far term. It informs the DoD’s foreign language planning and helps
direct resources for training, testing, incentivizing, recruiting, and manning.




Change 2, 08/25/2020                            18                                   GLOSSARY
