                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 5200.46
                                                                               September 9, 2014
                                             Incorporating Change 2, Effective November 2, 2020

                                                                                        USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:      DoD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidance for Issuing the Common Access
              Card (CAC)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01 (Reference
(a)), this instruction establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures for
investigating and adjudicating eligibility to hold a CAC consistent with References (b) through
(o). The CAC is the DoD personal identity verification (PIV) credential. This instruction
incorporates and cancels Enclosure 4, DoD Instruction 5200.02 (Reference (p)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to:

     a. OSD, the Military Departments (including the Coast Guard at all times, including when it
is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security by agreement with that Department), the
Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant
Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD
(hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

   b. The commissioned Corps of the U.S. Public Health Service (USPHS), under agreement
with the Department of Health and Human Services, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), under agreement with the Department of Commerce.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Individuals appropriately sponsored for a CAC consistent with DoD Manual 1000.13,
Volume 1 (Reference (b)) must be investigated and adjudicated in accordance with this
instruction. Individuals not CAC eligible may be processed for local or regional base passes in
accordance with Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) policy
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


guidance for DoD physical access control DoDI 5200.08 (Reference (q)) and local installation
security policies and procedures.

    b. A favorably adjudicated National Agency Check with Inquiries (NACI) or equivalent in
accordance with revised Federal Investigative Standards is the minimum investigation required
for a final credentialing determination for a CAC.

    c. Individuals requiring a CAC must meet the credentialing standards in accordance with the
U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) memorandums (References (c) and (d)) and this
instruction.

    d. A CAC may be issued on an interim basis based on a favorable National Agency Check or
a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) National Criminal History Check (fingerprint check)
adjudicated by appropriate approved automated procedures or by a trained security or human
resource (HR) specialist, and successful submission to the investigative service provider (ISP) of
a NACI or a personnel security investigation (PSI) equal to or greater in scope than a NACI.
Additionally, the CAC applicant must present two identity source documents, at least one of
which is a valid federal or State government-issued picture identification (Reference (c)).

    e. The subsequent credentialing determination will be made upon receipt of the completed
investigation from the ISP.

    f. Discretionary judgments used to render an adjudicative determination for issuing the CAC
are inherently governmental functions and must only be performed by trained U.S. Government
personnel who have successfully completed required training and possess a minimum level of
investigation (NACI or equivalent in accordance with revised Federal Investigative Standards).
Established administrative processes in Reference (p) and DoDD 5220.6 (Reference (r)) must be
applied.

   g. Adjudications rendered for eligibility for access to classified information, eligibility to
hold a sensitive position, suitability, or fitness for federal employment based on a NACI or
higher level investigation may result in a concurrent CAC decision for that position.

    h. Favorable credentialing adjudications from another federal department or agency will be
reciprocally accepted in accordance with conditions stated in the procedural guidance in this
instruction. Reciprocity must be based on final favorable adjudication only.

    i. CAC applicants or holders may appeal CAC denial or revocation in accordance with the
conditions stated in the procedural guidance in this instruction. Appeals must be processed as
indicated in the procedural guidance in this instruction.

    j. Non-U.S. nationals at foreign locations are not eligible to receive a CAC on an interim
basis. Special considerations for conducting background investigations of non-U.S. nationals are
addressed in Reference (c). An interim CAC may be issued to non-U.S. nationals in the U.S. or
U.S. territories if they have resided in the U.S. or U.S. territory for at least 3 years, and they



Change 2, 11/02/2020                          2
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


satisfy the requirements of paragraph 3.e. of this instruction and paragraph 4.b.(1) of Enclosure 3
of this instruction.

    k. Individuals who have been denied a CAC or have had a CAC revoked due to an
unfavorable credentialing determination are eligible to reapply for a credential 1 year after the
date of final adjudicative denial or revocation.

   l. Individuals with a statutory or regulatory bar are not eligible for reconsideration while
under debarment.

   m. Reports of investigations conducted as required for compliance with Homeland Security
Presidential Directive-12 (Reference (g)) be sent to the DoD Consolidated Adjudications
Facility.

    n. When eligibility is denied or revoked, CACs will be recovered whenever practicable, and
will immediately be rendered inoperable. In addition, agencies’ physical and logical access
systems will be immediately updated to eliminate the use of a CAC for access.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosures 3 and 4.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This administrative change:

    a. Updates the title of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary
of Defense for Intelligence and Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (h)).

   b. Updates references.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                         3
                                                          DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective September 9, 2014.




                                            Michael G. Vickers
                                            Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. CAC Investigative Procedures
   4. CAC Adjudicative Procedures
Glossary




Change 2, 11/02/2020                    4
                                                                                              DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................6

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................8

     USD(I&S) ..................................................................................................................................8
     USD(P&R) .................................................................................................................................8
     USD(AT&L) ..............................................................................................................................8
     GC DoD .....................................................................................................................................8
     DoD COMPONENT HEADS....................................................................................................9

ENCLOSURE 3: CAC INVESTIGATIVE PROCEDURES ......................................................10

     INVESTIGATIVE REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................................10
     SUBMISSION OF INVESTIGATIONS .................................................................................10
     RECIPROCITY .......................................................................................................................10
     FOREIGN (NON-U.S.) NATIONALS....................................................................................11
     INVESTIGATIONS ACCEPTABLE FOR CAC ADJUDICATION .....................................11

ENCLOSURE 4: CAC ADJUDICATIVE PROCEDURES.........................................................13

     GUIDANCE FOR APPLYING CREDENTIALING STANDARDS DURING
       ADJUDICATIONS ............................................................................................................13
     CREDENTIALING STANDARDS ........................................................................................14
     APPLICATION OF THE STANDARDS ...............................................................................14
     ADJUDICATION ....................................................................................................................15
     DENIAL OR REVOCATION .................................................................................................15
     APPEALS ................................................................................................................................16
     RECORDING FINAL DETERMINATION ...........................................................................17

     APPENDIXES
       1. BASIC ADJUDICATIVE STANDARDS ....................................................................18
       2. SUPPLEMENTAL ADJUDICATIVE STANDARDS ...............................................21


GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................28

     PART I: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................28
     PART II: DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................28

TABLE

     Favorably Adjudicated Investigations Acceptable for CAC Issuance.....................................12



Change 2, 11/02/2020                                              5
                                                                                                                              CONTENTS
                                                                           DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


                                                ENCLOSURE 1

                                                 REFERENCES

(a)     DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
        (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014 as amended
(b)     DoD Manual 1000.13, Volume 1, “DoD Identification (ID) Cards: ID Card Life-Cycle,”
        January 23, 2014, as amended
(c)     U.S. Office of Personnel Management Memorandum, “Final Credentialing Standards for
        Issuing Personal Identity Verification Cards Under HSPD-12,” July 31, 2008
(d)     U.S. Office of Personnel Management Memorandum, “Introduction of Credentialing,
        Suitability, and Security Clearance Decision-Making Guide,” January 14, 2008
(e)     Office of Management and Budget Memorandum M-05-24, “Implementation of Homeland
        Security Presidential Directive (HSPD) 12 - Policy for a Common Identification Standard
        for Federal Employees and Contractors,” August 5, 2005
(f)     U.S. Office of Personnel Management Federal Investigations Notice Number 06-04,
        “HSPD 12 – Advanced Fingerprint Results,” June 8, 2006
(g)     Homeland Security Presidential Directive-12, “Policy for a Common Identification
        Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors,” August 27, 2004
(h)     Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
        December 20, 2019
(i)     Sections 552, 552a 1, and 7313 of Title 5, United States Code
(j)     Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 201-2, “Personal Identity
        Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors,” August 2013
(k)     Executive Order 13467, “Reforming Processes Related to Suitability for Government
        Employment, Fitness for Contractor Employees, and Eligibility for Access to Classified
        National Security Information,” June 30, 2008
(l)     Executive Order 13488, “Granting Reciprocity on Excepted Service and Federal Contractor
        Employee Fitness and Reinvestigating Individuals in Positions of Public Trust,”
        January 16, 2009
(m)     Section 278g-3 of Title 15, United States Code
(n)     Section 11331 of Title 40, United States Code
(o)     U.S. Office of Personnel Management Federal Investigations Notice Number 10-05,
        “Reminder to Agencies of the Standards for Issuing Identity Credentials Under HSPD-12”
        May 17, 2010
(p)     DoD Instruction 5200.02, “DoD Personnel Security Program (PSP),” March 21, 2014, as
        amended
(q)     DoD Instruction 5200.08, “Security of DoD Installations and Resources and the DoD
        Physical Security Review Board (PSRB),” December 10, 2005, as amended
(r)     DoD Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
        Program,” January 2, 1992, as amended
(s)     Federal Acquisition Regulation, current edition
(t)     Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement, current edition


1
    Section 552a is also known as “The Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.”


Change 2, 11/02/2020                                 6
                                                                                           ENCLOSURE 1
                                                            DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


(u) DoD Directive 5145.01, “General Counsel of the Department of Defense (GC DoD),”
     December 2, 2013, as amended
(v) Title 8, United States Code, also known as “The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952,
     as amended,” June 27, 1952
(w) Parts 731, 732, and 736 of Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations
(x) Executive Order 12968, “Access to Classified Information,” August 7, 1995
(y) DoD Instruction 1000.01, “Identification (ID) Cards Required by the Geneva
     Conventions,” April 16, 2012, as amended
(z) DoD Directive 5240.06, “Counterintelligence Awareness and Reporting (CIAR),”
     May 17, 2011, as amended
(aa) Sections 801-830 of Title 21, United States Code (also known as “The Controlled
     Substances Act of 1970, as amended”)
(ab) Section 2331 of Title 19, United States Code




Change 2, 11/02/2020                      7
                                                                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(I&S). The USD(I&S) must:

    a. In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)) and the General Counsel of the Department of Defense (GC DoD), establish
adjudication procedures to support CAC credentialing decisions in accordance with References
(b) through (o) for issuing a CAC to Service members and DoD civilian personnel.

    b. In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
Logistics (USD(AT&L)) and the GC DoD, establish adjudication procedures to support a CAC
credentialing decision for contractors in accordance with the terms of applicable contracts and
References (b) through (o), the Federal Acquisition Regulation (Reference (s)), and the Defense
Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (Reference (t)).

   c. Issue, interpret, and clarify CAC investigative and adjudicative guidance in coordination
with the Suitability Executive Agent as necessary.


2. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R) must, in coordination with the GC DoD, implement CAC PSI
and adjudication procedures established herein as necessary to support issuance of a CAC to
Service members and DoD civilian personnel in accordance with References (b) through (o).


3. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L) must, in coordination with the GC DoD, implement CAC
PSI and adjudication procedures established by the USD(I&S) for contractors in accordance with
the terms of applicable contracts and References (b) through (o), (s), and (t).


4. GC DoD. The GC DoD must:

   a. Provide advice and guidance as to the legal sufficiency of procedures and standards
involved in adjudicating CAC investigations.

    b. Perform functions relating to the DoD Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD)-
12 Program in accordance with Reference (r) and DoDD 5145.01 (Reference (u)) including
maintenance and oversight of the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) and its
involvement in contractor CAC revocations as specified in subparagraph 6.a.(2) of Enclosure 4
of this instruction.

   c. Coordinate on USD(P&R) implementation of CAC PSI and adjudication procedures, in
accordance with References (b) through (o), for Service members and DoD civilian personnel,



Change 2, 11/02/2020                        8
                                                                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


and USD(AT&L) implementation of USD(I&S) procedures for CAC PSI and adjudication in
accordance with the terms of applicable contracts and References (b) through (o), (s), and (t).


5. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads must:

   a. Comply with and implement this instruction.

    b. Provide resources for PSIs, adjudication, appeals, and recording of final adjudicative
results in a centralized database.

   c. Require individuals sponsored for a CAC to meet eligibility requirements stated in
Reference (b).

   d. Provide appeals boards for those individuals appealing CAC denial or revocation as
specified in subparagraph 6.a.(1) of Enclosure 4 of this instruction.

    e. Enforce requirements for reporting of derogatory information, unfavorable administrative
actions, and adverse actions to personnel security, HR, and counterintelligence official(s), as
appropriate.

    f. Require all PSIs submitted for non-DoD personnel to be supported by and comply with
DoD PIV procedures in contracts that implement requirements of paragraphs 4.1303 and 52.204-
9 of Reference (s).

    g. Require all investigations and adjudications required for non-DoD personnel to be in
response to a current, active contract or agreement and that the number of personnel submitted
for investigation and adjudication does not exceed the specific requirements of that contract or
agreement while ensuring compliance with HSPD-12.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                         9
                                                                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014



                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                            CAC INVESTIGATIVE PROCEDURES


1. INVESTIGATIVE REQUIREMENTS

    a. A personnel security investigation (NACI or greater) completed by an authorized ISP is
required to support a CAC credentialing determination based on the established credentialing
standards promulgated by OPM (Reference (c)).

    b. Individuals identified as having a favorably adjudicated investigation on record,
equivalent to or greater than the NACI, do not require an additional investigation for CAC
issuance.

    c. There is no requirement to reinvestigate CAC holders unless they are subject to
reinvestigation for national security or suitability reasons as specified in applicable DoD
issuances.


2. SUBMISSION OF INVESTIGATIONS. Investigative packages must be submitted promptly
by HR or security personnel to the authorized ISP. Fingerprints for CAC applicants must be
taken by HR or security personnel. DoD Components using the OPM as the ISP may request
advanced fingerprint check results in accordance with (Reference (f)).


3. RECIPROCITY

    a. The sponsoring Component must not re-adjudicate CAC determinations for individuals
transferring from another federal department or agency, provided:

       (1) The individual’s former department or agency verifies possession of a valid PIV.

        (2) The individual has undergone the required NACI or other equivalent (or greater)
suitability or national security investigation and received favorable adjudication from the former
department or agency.

       (3) There is no break in service 2 years or more and the individual has no actionable
information since the date of the last completed investigation.

   b. Interim CAC determinations are not eligible to be transferred or reciprocally accepted.
Reciprocity must be based on final favorable adjudication only.




                                                10
Change 2, 11/02/2020                                                       ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


4. FOREIGN (NON-U.S.) NATIONALS. DoD Components must apply the credentialing
process and standards in this instruction to non-U.S. nationals who work as employees or
contractor employees for the DoD. However, special considerations apply to non-U.S. nationals.

   a. At Foreign Locations

       (1) DoD Components must initiate and ensure completion of a background investigation
before applying the credentialing standards to a non-U.S. national at a foreign location. The
background investigation must be favorably adjudicated before a CAC can be issued to a non-
U.S. national at a foreign location. The type of background investigation may vary based on
standing reciprocity treaties concerning identity assurance and information exchanges that exist
between the U.S. and its allies or agency agreements with the host country.

       (2) The investigation of a non-U.S. national at a foreign location must be consistent with
a NACI, to the extent possible, and include a fingerprint check against the FBI criminal history
database, an FBI investigations files (name check) search, and a name check against the terrorist
screening database.

  b. At U.S.-Based Locations and in U.S. Territories (Other than American Samoa and
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands)

        (1) Individuals who are non-U.S. nationals in the United States or U.S. territory for
3 years or more must have a NACI or equivalent investigation initiated after employment
authorization is appropriately verified.

         (2) Non-U.S. nationals who have been in the United States or U.S. territory for less than
3 years do not meet the investigative requirements for CAC issuance. DoD Components may
delay the background investigation of a Non-U.S. national who has been in the U.S. or U.S.
territory for less than 3 years until the individual has been in the United States or U.S. territory
for at least 3 years. In the event of such a delay, an alternative facility access identity credential
may be issued at the discretion of the relevant DoD Component official, as appropriate based on
a risk determination, and in accordance with References (c) and (q).

       (3) The U.S. territories of American Samoa and the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands are not included in the “United States” as defined by the Immigration and
Nationality Act, as amended (Reference (v)).


5. INVESTIGATIONS ACCEPTABLE FOR CAC ADJUDICATION. A list of investigations
acceptable for CAC adjudication is located in the Table. These investigations are equivalent to
or greater than a NACI. This list will be updated by the USD(I&S) as revisions to the Federal
investigative standards are implemented.




                                                  11
Change 2, 11/02/2020                                                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                            DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


           Table. Favorably Adjudicated Investigations Acceptable for CAC Issuance

Investigation   Description
ANACI           Access National Agency Check and Inquires
BGI-0112        Upgrade Background Investigation (1-12 months from LBI)
BGI-1336        Upgrade Background Investigation (13-36 months from LBI)
BGI-3760        Upgrade Background Investigation (37-60 months from LBI)
BI              Background Investigation
BIPN            Background Investigation plus Current National Agency Check
BIPR            Periodic Reinvestigation of Background Investigation
BITN            Background Investigation (10 year scope)
CNCI            Child Care National Agency Check plus Written Inquires and Credit
IBI             Interview Oriented Background Investigation
LBI             Limited Background Investigation
LBIP            Limited Background Investigation plus Current National Agency Check
LBIX            Limited Background Investigation - Expanded
MBI             Moderate Risk Background Investigation
MBIP            Moderate Risk Background Investigation plus Current National Agency Check
MBIX            Moderate Risk Background Investigation - Expanded
                National Agency Check/National Agency Check plus Written Inquires and
NACB            Credit Check plus Background Investigation Requested
NACI            National Agency Check and Inquires
NACLC           National Agency Check with Law and Credit
                National Agency Check/National Agency Check plus Written Inquires and
NACS            Credit Check plus Single Scope B.I. Requested
NACW            National Agency Check plus Written Inquires and Credit
                National Agency Check plus Written Inquires and Credit plus Special
NACZ            Investigative Inquiry
NLC             National Agency Check, Local Agency Check and Credit
                National Agency Check plus Written Inquires and Credit Plus Current National
NNAC            Agency Check
NSI             NSI - NACI/Suitability Determination
PRI             Periodic Reinvestigation
PRS             Periodic Reinvestigation Secret
PRSC            Periodic Reinvestigation Secret or Confidential
PPR             Phased Periodic Reinvestigation
SPR             Secret Periodic Reinvestigation
SSBI            Single Scope Background Investigation
SSBI-PR         Periodic Reinvestigation for SSBI




                                              12
Change 2, 11/02/2020                                                  ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


                                         ENCLOSURE 4

                             CAC ADJUDICATIVE PROCEDURES


1. GUIDANCE FOR APPLYING CREDENTIALING STANDARDS DURING
ADJUDICATION

    a. As established in Reference (g), credentialing adjudication considers whether or not an
individual is eligible for long-term access to federally controlled facilities and/or information
systems. The ultimate determination to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a
credentialing determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable
credentialing standards in Reference (c).

   b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise an adjudicative
concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. Factors to be
applied consistently to all information available to the adjudicator are:

        (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious the conduct, the greater
the potential for an adverse CAC determination.

        (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient information concerning the
circumstances of the conduct must be obtained to determine whether there is a reasonable basis
to believe the conduct poses a risk to people, property or information systems.

        (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more frequent conduct is
of greater concern.

        (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. Offenses committed as
a minor are usually treated as less serious than the same offenses committed as an adult, unless
the offense is very recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous.

        (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural conditions may be relevant
to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk
if the conditions are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with
relatively minor issues).

      (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if relevant, to address
conduct adverse to CAC determinations.

           (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a favorable
adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional guidance, where appropriate;
demonstrating positive changes in behavior and employment).




Change 2, 11/02/2020                         13
                                                                                   ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


           (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not just alcohol and drug
abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be a consideration, other factors (such as the
individual’s employment record) may also be indications of rehabilitation.

    c. CAC adjudicators must successfully complete formal training through a DoD CAC
adjudicator course from the Defense Security Service Center for Development of Security
Excellence or a course approved by the Suitability Executive Agent.


2. CREDENTIALING STANDARDS. HSPD-12 credentialing standards contained in
Reference (c) must be used to render a final determination whether to issue or revoke a CAC
based on results of a qualifying PSI.

    a. Basic Standards. CAC credentialing standards and the adjudicative guidelines described
in Appendix 1 of this enclosure are designed to guide the adjudicator who must determine, based
on results of a qualifying PSI, whether CAC issuance is consistent with the basic standards,
would create an unacceptable risk for the U.S. Government, or would provide an avenue for
terrorism.

    b. Supplemental Standards. The supplemental standards are intended to ensure that the
issuance of a CAC to an individual does not create unacceptable risk. The supplemental
credentialing standards must be applied, in addition to the basic credentialing standards. In this
context, an unacceptable risk refers to an unacceptable risk to the life, safety, or health of
employees, contractors, vendors, or visitors; to the Government’s physical assets or information
systems; to personal property; to records, including classified, privileged, proprietary, financial,
or medical records; or to the privacy of data subjects. The supplemental credentialing standards,
in addition to the basic credentialing standards, must be used for CAC adjudication of
individuals who are not also subject to the following types of adjudication:

       (1) Eligibility to hold a sensitive position or for access to classified information,

       (2) Suitability for federal employment in the competitive service, or

       (3) Qualification for federal employment in the excepted service.


3. APPLICATION OF THE STANDARDS

   a. CAC credentialing standards will be applied to all DoD civilian employees, Service
members, and contractors who are CAC eligible, have been sponsored by a DoD entity, and
require: (1) physical access to DoD facilities or non-DoD facilities on behalf of DoD; (2) logical
access to information systems (whether on site or remotely); or (3) remote access to DoD
networks that use only the CAC logon for user authentication.

    b. If an individual is found unsuitable for competitive civil service consistent with 5 CFR
part 731 (Reference (w)), ineligible for access to classified information pursuant to Executive

Change 2, 11/02/2020                         14
                                                                                    ENCLOSURE 4
                                                               DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


Order 12968 (Reference (x)), or disqualified from appointment in the excepted service or from
working on a contract, the unfavorable decision may be sufficient basis for non-issuance or
revocation of a CAC, but does not necessarily mandate this result.


4. ADJUDICATION. The CAC adjudicators will consider the information provided by the
CAC PSI in rendering a CAC credentialing determination. The determination will be
unfavorable if there is a reasonable basis to conclude that a disqualifying factor in accordance
with the basic CAC credentialing standards is substantiated, or when there is a reasonable basis
to conclude that derogatory information or conduct relating to the supplemental CAC
credentialing standards presents an unacceptable risk for the U.S. Government.

    a. If a DoD Component or DOHA proposes to deny or revoke a CAC under conditions other
than those cited in paragraph 3.b. of this enclosure, the DoD Component or DOHA, as
appropriate in accordance with section 6.a. of this enclosure, must issue the individual a written
statement (also known as a letter of denial (LOD) or revocation (LOR)) identifying the
disqualifying condition(s). The statement must contain a summary of the concerns and
supporting adverse information, instructions for responding, and copies of the relevant CAC
credentialing standards and adjudicative guidelines from Appendix 1 or 2 of this enclosure. The
written LOD or LOR must be as comprehensive and detailed as permitted by the requirements of
national security and to protect sources that were granted confidentiality, and as allowed
pursuant to provisions of sections 552 and 552a of Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.)
(Reference (i)). (Section 552a is also known and hereinafter referred to as “The Privacy Act of
1974, as amended.”)

   b. The individual may elect to respond in writing to the DoD Component or DOHA, as
appropriate, within 30 calendar days from the date of the LOD or LOR. Failure to respond to the
LOD or LOR will result in automatic CAC denial or revocation.

    c. When, subsequent to issuance of an interim or final CAC, the U.S. Government receives
credible information that raises questions as to whether a current CAC holder continues to meet
the applicable credentialing standards, the DoD Component may reconsider the credentialing
determination using the procedures in this instruction.


5. DENIAL OR REVOCATION

   a. DoD Components must deny or revoke a CAC if the individual fails to respond to the
LOD or LOR within the specified time-frame or the response to the written statement has not
provided a basis to reverse the decision.

   b. Denial or revocation of a CAC must comply with applicable governing laws and
regulations:

       (1) The U.S. Coast Guard will afford individuals appeal rights as established in
applicable Department of Homeland Security and U.S. Coast Guard issuances.

Change 2, 11/02/2020                        15
                                                                                 ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014



        (2) CAC provides Service members with Geneva Convention protection in accordance
with DoD Instruction 1000.01 (Reference (y)), and authorized benefits (e.g. medical) and must
not be revoked or denied pursuant to the provisions of this instruction. CAC for Military Service
members will be surrendered only upon separation, discharge, or retirement.

         (3) In certain instances, a CAC provides other benefits or specific privileges to civilian
employees (e.g. medical, post exchange and commissary) when assigned overseas long-term; or
protected status to civilian employees and contractors who are accompanying U.S. forces during
overseas deployments in accordance with Reference (y). CAC for DoD civilians or contractors
in this circumstance will not be revoked pursuant to the provisions of this instruction, but may be
surrendered as part of other adverse employment or contracting actions or procedures.

    c. When eligibility is denied or revoked, the CAC will be recovered whenever practicable
and will immediately be rendered inoperable. In addition, agency’s physical and local access
systems will immediately be updated to eliminate the use of the CAC for access.


6. APPEALS

   a. Individuals who have been denied a CAC or have had a CAC revoked due to an
unfavorable credentialing determination must be entitled to appeal the determination in
accordance with the following procedures:

        (1) Except as stated in paragraph b, new civilian and contractor applicants who have
been denied a CAC may elect to appeal to a three member board composed of not more than one
security representative and one human resources representative.

       (2) Contractor employees who have had their CAC revoked may appeal the unfavorable
determination to the DOHA in accordance with the established administrative process set out in
Reference (r).

    b. This appeal process does not apply when a CAC is denied or revoked as a result of either
an unfavorable suitability determination consistent with part 731 of Reference (w) or a decision
to deny or revoke eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility for a sensitive
national security position, since the person is already entitled to seek review in accordance with
applicable suitability or national security procedures. Likewise, there is no right to appeal when
the decision to deny the CAC is based on the results of a separate determination to disqualify the
person from an appointment in the excepted service or to bar the person from working for or on
behalf of a federal department or agency.

   c. The DoD Component will notify the individual in writing of the final determination and
provide a statement that this determination is not subject to further appeal.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                        16
                                                                                  ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


7. RECORDING FINAL DETERMINATION. Immediately following final adjudication, the
sponsoring activity must record the final eligibility determination (e.g., active, revoked, denied)
in the OPM Central Verification System as directed by Reference (c). DoD Component records
will document the adjudicative rationale. Adjudicative records will be made available to
authorized recipients as required for appeal purposes.

Appendixes
   1. Basic Adjudicative Standards
   2. Supplemental Adjudicative Standards




Change 2, 11/02/2020                         17
                                                                                   ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


                               APPENDIX 1 TO ENCLOSURE 4

                            BASIC ADJUDICATIVE STANDARDS


1. A CAC will not be issued to a person if the individual is known to be or reasonably suspected
of being a terrorist.

    a. Individuals entrusted with access to federal property and information systems must not put
the U.S. Government at risk or provide an avenue for terrorism.

   b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include evidence that the individual has
knowingly and willfully been involved with reportable domestic or international terrorist
contacts or foreign intelligence entities, counterintelligence activities, indicators, or other
behaviors described in DoDD 5240.06 (Reference (z)).

2. A CAC will not be issued to a person if the employer is unable to verify the individual’s
claimed identity.

    a. To be considered eligible for a CAC, the individual’s identity must be clearly
authenticated. The CAC must not be issued when identity cannot be authenticated.

   b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:

        (1) The individual claimed it was not possible to provide two identity source documents
from the list of acceptable documents in Form I-9, Office of Management and Budget No. 1115-
0136, “Employment Eligibility Verification,”(available at http://www.uscis.gov/files/form/i-
9.pdf) or provided only one identity source document from the list of acceptable documents.

       (2) The individual did not appear in person as required by Federal Information
Processing Standards Publication 201-2 (Reference (j)).

       (3) The individual refused to cooperate with the documentation and investigative
requirements to validate his or her identity.

       (4) The investigation failed to confirm the individual’s claimed identity.

   c. No conditions can mitigate inability to verify the applicant’s identity.

3. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe the individual
has submitted fraudulent information concerning his or her identity.

    a. Substitution occurred in the identity proofing process; the individual who appeared
on one occasion was not the same person that appeared on another occasion.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                        18
                                                               APPENDIX 1 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


    b. The fingerprints associated with the identity do not belong to the person attempting to
obtain a CAC.

    c. No conditions can mitigate submission of fraudulent information in an attempt to obtain a
current credential.

4. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe the individual
will attempt to gain unauthorized access to classified documents, information protected by the
Privacy Act, as amended (Reference (i)), information that is proprietary in nature, or other
sensitive or protected information.

    a. Individuals must comply with information-handling regulations and rules. Individuals
must properly handle classified and protected information such as sensitive or proprietary
information.

    b. Individuals should not attempt to gain unauthorized access to classified documents or
other sensitive or protected information. Unauthorized access to U.S. Government information
or improper use of U.S. Government information once access is granted may pose a significant
risk to national security, may compromise individual privacy, and may make public information
that is proprietary in nature, thus compromising the operations and missions of federal agencies.

   c. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include any attempt to gain unauthorized
access to classified, sensitive, proprietary or other protected information.

    d. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to
believe there is an unacceptable risk include:

       (1) Since the time of the last act or activities, the person has demonstrated a favorable
change in behavior.

       (2) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s ability and
willingness to properly handle protected information.

5. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe the individual
will use an identity credential outside the workplace unlawfully or inappropriately.

   a. Conditions that may be disqualifying include:

      (1) Documented history of fraudulent requests for credentials or other official
documentation.

      (2) Previous incidents in which the individual used credentials or other official
documentation to circumvent rules or regulations.

       (3) A history of incidents that put physical assets or personal property at risk.

Change 2, 11/02/2020                         19
                                                                APPENDIX 1 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                               DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014



    b. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to
believe there is an unacceptable risk include that the behavior happened so long ago, was minor,
or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s ability and willingness to use credentials lawfully and appropriately.

6. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe the individual
will use federally-controlled information systems unlawfully, make unauthorized modifications
to such systems, corrupt or destroy such systems, or engage in inappropriate uses of such
systems.

    a. Individuals must comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations pertaining to
information technology systems and properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and
information. The individual should not attempt to use federally-controlled information systems
unlawfully, make unauthorized modifications, corrupt or destroy, or engage in inappropriate uses
of such systems. A CAC must not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe
the individual will do so or has done so in the past.

   b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:

      (1) Illegal, unauthorized, or inappropriate use of an information technology system or
component.

      (2) Unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation of information, software,
firmware, or hardware to corrupt or destroy information technology systems or data.

    c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to
believe there is an unacceptable risk include that the behavior happened so long ago, was minor,
or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s ability and willingness to conform to rules and regulations for use of
information technology systems.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                       20
                                                              APPENDIX 1 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


                               APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 4

                      SUPPLEMENTAL ADJUDICATIVE STANDARDS


1. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, based on the
individual’s misconduct or negligence in employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an
unacceptable risk.

    a. An individual’s employment misconduct or negligence may put people, property, or
information systems at risk.

   b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:

        (1) A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, violent, or other
acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, property, or information systems.

       (2) A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations in the workplace which put people,
property or information at risk.

      (3) A documented history of misusing workplace information systems to view,
download, or distribute pornography.

      (4) Violation of written or recorded commitments to protect information made to an
employer, such as breach(es) of confidentiality or the release of proprietary or other information.

        (5) Failure to comply with rules or regulations for the safeguarding of classified,
sensitive, or other protected information.

    c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to
believe there is an unacceptable risk include:

       (1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current
trustworthiness or good judgment relating to the safety of people and proper safeguarding of
property and information systems.

       (2) The individual was not adequately warned that the conduct was unacceptable and
could not reasonably be expected to know that the conduct was wrong.

       (3) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the behavior.

       (4) The individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial training and has since
demonstrated a positive attitude toward the discharge of information-handling or security
responsibilities.

Change 2, 11/02/2020                        21
                                                               APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


2. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, based on the
individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.

    a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about his or her reliability
or trustworthiness and may put people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s
past criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information systems at risk.
    b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:

         (1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety of people at
risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A person’s convictions for burglary
may indicate that granting a CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical
assets and to employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility.

        (2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of people and proper
protection of property or information systems, regardless of whether the person was formally
charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.

       (3) Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, perjury, forgery, or
attempting to obtain identity documentation without proper authorization).

        (4) Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee theft, check
fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, or other
intentional financial breaches of trust.

       (5) Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that poses an
unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled facilities and federally-controlled
information systems. For example, convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a
CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. Government facilities.

       (6) Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the individual’s honesty and put
people, property or information systems at risk, although financial debt should not in and of itself
be cause for denial.

       (7) Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts or deliberately
providing false or misleading information to an employer, investigator, security official,
competent medical authority, or other official U.S. Government representative, particularly when
doing so results in personal benefit or which results in a risk to the safety of people and proper
safeguarding of property and information systems.

    c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to
believe there is an unacceptable risk include:

       (1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened under such
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.

Change 2, 11/02/2020                         22
                                                                APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


       (2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did not commit the
offense and details and reasons support his or her innocence.

        (3) Improper or inadequate advice from authorized personnel or legal counsel
significantly contributed to the individual’s omission of information. When confronted, the
individual provided an accurate explanation and made prompt, good-faith effort to correct the
situation.

       (4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, constructive
community involvement, or passage of time without recurrence.

3. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, based on the
individual’s material, intentional false statement, deception, or fraud in connection with federal
or contract employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.

   a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put people, property, or information systems at risk.

    b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, intentional falsification,
deception or fraud related to answers or information provided during the employment process for
the current or a prior federal or contract employment (e.g., on the employment application or
other employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during interviews.)

    c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to
believe there is an unacceptable risk include:

       (1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, or happened under
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.

      (2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by
a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation.

4. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, based on the
nature or duration of the individual’s alcohol abuse without evidence of substantial
rehabilitation, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.

    a. An individual’s abuse of alcohol may put people, property, or information systems at risk.
Alcohol abuse can lead to the exercise of questionable judgment or failure to control impulses,
and may put people, property, or information systems at risk, regardless of whether he or she is
diagnosed as an abuser of alcohol or alcohol dependent. A person’s long-term abuse of alcohol
without evidence of substantial rehabilitation may indicate that granting a CAC poses an
unacceptable safety risk in a U.S. Government facility.

   b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:
Change 2, 11/02/2020                         23
                                                                APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014



       (1) A pattern of alcohol-related arrests.

        (2) Alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an
intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job.

       (3) Current continuing abuse of alcohol.

        (4) Failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, treatment,
or abstinence.

    c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to
believe there is an unacceptable risk include:

       (1) The individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse,
provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of
abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an abuser of alcohol).

       (2) The individual is participating in counseling or treatment programs, has no history of
previous treatment or relapse, and is making satisfactory progress.

        (3) The individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or
rehabilitation along with any required aftercare. He or she has demonstrated a clear and
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment
recommendations, such as participation in an alcohol treatment program. The individual has
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.

5. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, based on the
nature or duration of the individual’s illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled
substances without evidence of substantial rehabilitation, that issuance of a CAC poses an
unacceptable risk.

    a. An individual’s abuse of drugs may put people, property, or information systems at risk.
Illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled substances, to include abuse of prescription or
over-the-counter drugs, can raise questions about his or her trustworthiness, or ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. For example, a person’s long-term
illegal use of narcotics without evidence of substantial rehabilitation may indicate that granting a
CAC poses an unacceptable safety risk in a U.S. Government facility.

   b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:

       (1) Current or recent illegal drug use, serious narcotic, or other controlled substance
offense.

       (2) A pattern of drug-related arrests or problems in employment.
Change 2, 11/02/2020                         24
                                                                APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                  DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014



        (3) Illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,
sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, or possession of drug paraphernalia.

       (4) Diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence.

       (5) Evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical social worker
who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment program.

        (6) Failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by a duly
qualified medical professional.

       (7) Any illegal drug use after formally agreeing to comply with rules or regulations
prohibiting drug use.

       (8) Any illegal use or abuse of prescription or over-the-counter drugs.

    c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to
believe there is an unacceptable risk include:

        (1) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur (e.g., clear, lengthy break since last use; strong evidence
the use will not occur again).

       (2) A demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:

           (a) Abstaining from drug use.

           (b) Disassociating from drug-using associates and contacts.

           (c) Changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used.

        (3) Abuse of prescription drugs followed a severe or prolonged illness during which
these drugs were prescribed and abuse has since ended.

        (4) Satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but not
limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.

6. A CAC will not be issued to a person if a statutory or regulatory bar prevents the individual’s
contract employment; or would prevent federal employment under circumstances that furnish a
reasonable basis to believe that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.

   a. The purpose of this standard is to verify whether there is a bar on contract employment, or
whether the contract employee is subject to a federal employment debarment for reasons that
Change 2, 11/02/2020                          25
                                                                 APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


also pose an unacceptable risk in the contracting context. For example, a person’s 5-year bar on
federal employment based on a felony conviction related to inciting a riot or civil disorder, as
specified in section 7313 of Reference (i), may indicate that granting a CAC poses an
unacceptable risk to persons, property, and assets in U.S. Government facilities.

   b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:

      (1) A debarment was imposed by OPM, DoD, or other federal agencies when the
conduct poses an unacceptable risk to people, property, or information systems.

       (2) The suitability debarment was based on the presence of serious suitability issues
when the conduct poses an unacceptable risk to people, property, or information systems.

   c. Circumstances relevant to the determination include:

       (1) Applicant proves the reason(s) for the debarment no longer exists.

       (2) The debarment is job or position-specific and is not applicable to the job currently
under consideration.

7. A CAC will not be issued to a person if the individual has knowingly and willfully engaged in
acts or activities designed to overthrow the U.S. government by force.

   a. Individuals entrusted with access to U.S. Government property and information systems
must not put the U.S. Government at risk.

   b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:

       (1) Illegal involvement in, support of, training to commit, or advocacy of any act of
sabotage, espionage, treason or sedition against the United States of America.

       (2) Association or agreement with persons who attempt to or commit any of the acts in
subparagraph 7.b.(1) of this section with the specific intent to further those unlawful aims.

        (3) Association or agreement with persons or organizations that advocate, threaten, or
use force or violence, or use any other illegal or unconstitutional means in an effort to overthrow
or influence the U.S. Government.

    c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to
believe there is an unacceptable risk include:

       (1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current
trustworthiness.



Change 2, 11/02/2020                        26
                                                               APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


       (2) The person was not aware of the person’s or organization’s dedication to illegal,
treasonous, or seditious activities or did not have the specific intent to further the illegal,
treasonous, or seditious ends of the person or organization.

        (3) The individual did not have the specific intent to incite others to advocate, threaten,
or use force or violence, or use any other illegal or unconstitutional means to engage in illegal,
treasonous, or seditious activities.

       (4) The individual’s involvement in the activities was for an official purpose.




Change 2, 11/02/2020                         27
                                                                APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


                                           GLOSSARY


                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CAC                   common access card

DoDD                  DoD directive
DOHA                  Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals

FBI                   Federal Bureau of Investigation

GC DoD                General Counsel of the Department of Defense

HR                    human resource

ISP                   investigative service provider

NACI                  National Agency Check with Inquiries
NISP                  National Industrial Security Program

OPM                   U.S. Office of Personnel Management

PIV                   personal identity verification
PSI                   personnel security investigation

U.S.C.                United States Code
USCIS                 U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
USD(AT&L)             Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics
USD(I&S)              Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
USD(P&R)              Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness

                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.

actionable information. Information that potentially justifies an unfavorable credentialing
determination.

CAC. The DoD Federal PIV card.

contractor. Defined in Executive Order 13467 (Reference (k)).

contractor employee fitness. Defined in Reference (k).




Change 2, 11/02/2020                         28
                                                                                     GLOSSARY
                                                               DoDI 5200.46, September 9, 2014


debarment. A prohibition from taking a competitive service examination or from being hired (or
retained in) a covered position for a specific time period.

drugs. Mood and behavior-altering substances, including drugs, materials, and other chemical
compounds identified and listed in sections 801-830 of title 21, U.S.C. (also known as “The
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended”(Reference (aa)) (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, hallucinogens), and inhalants and other similar substances.

drug abuse. The illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from
approved medical direction.

employee. Defined in Reference (x).

fitness. Defined in Executive Order 13488 (Reference (l)).

fitness determination. Defined in Reference (l).

logical and physical access. Defined in Reference (k).

material. Defined in part 731 of Reference (w).

reasonable basis. A reasonable basis to believe occurs when a disinterested observer, with
knowledge of the same facts and circumstances, would reasonably reach the same conclusion.

Suitability Executive Agent. Defined in Reference (k)

terrorism. Defined in section 2331 of Title 19, U.S.C. (Reference (ab)).

unacceptable risk. A threat to the life, safety, or health of employees, contractors, vendors, or
visitors; to the U.S. Government physical assets or information systems; to personal property; to
records, including classified, privileged, proprietary, financial, and medical records; or to the
privacy rights established by The Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, or other law that is deemed
unacceptable when making risk management determinations.

U.S. national. Defined in Reference (c).




Change 2, 11/02/2020                        29
                                                                                     GLOSSARY
