                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION
                                                                              NUMBER 8440.01
                                                                              December 24, 2015

                                                                                          DoD CIO

SUBJECT:     DoD Information Technology (IT) Service Management (ITSM)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. Pursuant to the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5144.02 (Reference (a)), this
instruction:

   a. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for ITSM in
accordance with DoDD 8000.01 (Reference (b)) and DoD Instruction (DoDI) 8320.02
(Reference (c)).

    b. Provides a DoD-wide standard ITSM framework for the implementation and management
of high quality IT services. This includes service management standards that enable
conformance to objectives, integrated operations, audit, and capability assessment.

   c. Provides a standard service quality measurement model in the ITSM framework to
support comparison, evaluation, and improvement of DoD IT services, as described in the DoD
Enterprise Service Management Framework (DESMF) (Reference (d)).

    d. Provides for continual improvement of the DESMF leading to efficient integrated
enterprise service management capabilities, improved IT service quality, and better IT
investment decisions.

   e. Establishes the governance mechanisms required to develop DoD ITSM standards, to
develop integrated capabilities, and to monitor conformance.


2. APPLICABILITY

    a. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the
Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this
instruction as the “DoD Components”).
                                                                DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


    b. Nothing in this instruction alters or supersedes the existing authorities and policies of the
Director of National Intelligence regarding the protection of Sensitive Compartmented
Information as directed by Executive Order 12333 (Reference (f)) and other laws and
regulations.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The DoD will promote the effective use of enterprise standards for the management of IT
services across the DoD in accordance with the “Department of Defense (DoD) Information
Technology (IT) Enterprise Strategy and Roadmap” (Reference (g)) and the DESMF.

   b. Service quality and integrated service management capabilities for DoD IT services will
be measured and evaluated based on DoD ITSM standards as articulated in the DESMF. The
DoD ITSM standards will be developed and maintained within the DESMF.

   c. IT services will be defined, categorized, published, and measured based on the DESMF.

   d. DoD Components will conform to the DESMF at the conformance level prescribed by the
Chief Information Officer of the Department of Defense (DoD CIO).

    e. The DESMF describes the manner in which ITSM is to be performed in the Joint
Information Environment (JIE) in accordance with the JIE White Paper (Reference (h)).

    f. Conformance to DESMF should be considered in all portfolio management decisions by
the portfolio owners identified in DoDI 8115.02 (Reference (i)).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosures 3 and 4.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.




                                                  2
                                                        DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective December 24, 2015.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. DESMF Description
   4. Procedures
Glossary




                                           3
                                                                DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


                                                  ENCLOSURE 1

                                                  REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5144.02, “DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO),” November 21, 2014
(b) DoD Directive 8000.01, “Management of the Department of Defense Information
    Enterprise,” February 10, 2009
(c) DoD Instruction 8320.02, “Sharing Data, Information, and Information Technology (IT)
    Services in the Department of Defense,” August 5, 2013
(d) Defense Enterprise Service Management Framework (DESMF) Edition II, April 8, 20151
(e) General Services Administration, “Federal Procurement Data System Product and Services
    Codes Manual,” August 2011
(f) Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981, as
    amended
(g) DoD Chief Information Officer, “Department of Defense (DoD) Information Technology
    (IT) Enterprise Strategy and Roadmap,” September 6, 2011
(h) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “Joint Information Environment (JIE) White Paper,”
    January 22, 2013
(i) DoD Instruction 8115.02, “Information Technology Portfolio Management
    Implementation,” October 30, 2006
(j) DoD Chief Information Officer Plan, “Department of Defense Enterprise Architecture (EA)
    Modernization Blueprint/Transition Plan,” February 25, 2011
(k) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Department of Defense Information
    Technology Governance Process,” November 10, 2014




1
    Available at http://dodcio.defense.gov/itsm/desmf



                                                        4                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. DoD CIO. The DoD CIO:

    a. Monitors, evaluates, and coordinates ITSM activities across the DoD, including
adjudication of issues across IT investment portfolios, authoritative bodies, mission areas, and
communities of interest, in accordance with Reference (c), Reference (i), and this instruction.

   b. Manages the DESMF to ensure it continually meets organizational needs as ITSM
capabilities increase and the DoD moves towards full implementation of JIE.

    c. Provides a DoD-level IT service catalog to provide an enterprise view of IT services
across the DoD in a manner consistent with the DESMF.

    d. Provides guidance to the DoD Components on how to identify and register IT services in
the DoD-level IT service catalog.

   e. Prescribes required conformance level standard to DoD Components, as described in
Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

    f. Monitors DoD Component conformance to the prescribed DESMF conformance level and
adjudicates requests from DoD Components for exceptions.

    g. Evaluates the ITSM capability and IT service quality throughout the DoD and
recommends continuation, modification, consolidation, or termination of IT services.

    h. Evaluates overall effectiveness of and conformance to the DESMF and ensures return on
investment is maximized in accordance with Reference (i).


2. DIRECTOR, DISA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the DoD CIO and in
addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, the Director DISA:

    a. Establishes the appropriate mechanisms to liaise with industry and academia regarding
best practices for ITSM, and presents these findings to the DoD CIO and DoD Components for
incorporation into the DESMF.

  b Provides technical assistance as required to assist DoD Components to conform to the
DESMF.


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). In coordination with the DoD CIO, the USD(AT&L):



                                                 5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015



    a. Synchronizes and aligns Defense Acquisition System and other defense acquisition
policies and procedures related to IT services, in accordance with this instruction.

   b. Provides guidance to program managers and program executive officers to evaluate and
approve system or program implementation of ITSM practices.


4. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

   a. Plan for and allocate the appropriate resources required to comply with this instruction.

   b. Provide input to and participate with DoD CIO in the collaborative development and
annual review and update of the DESMF.

   c. Develop a plan to conform to the DESMF at the conformance level identified by the DoD
CIO.

   d. Execute the DESMF conformance plan.

    e. Measure IT service quality and service management capability at a minimum of annually
or as additionally promulgated by the DoD CIO to enable an enterprise view on the delivery
efficiency of IT services and ability to meet DoD mission and business enterprise requirements.

    f. Identify and register all Component IT services in the designated DoD level service
catalog pursuant to Reference (c).




                                                6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                                   DESMF DESCRIPTION


The DESMF is the single service management framework for the DoD. The DESMF provides a
service management reference model, objectively assessable service management practices, and
conformance requirements for measuring service quality, together enabling an integrated service
management capability in DoD.

   a. The DESMF will include:

       (1) A Defense Service Quality Model that provides measurement standards for service
description, service categorization, and service quality.

        (2) A Defense Service Management Process Reference Model containing standardized
process descriptions to support implementation, audit, assessment, and organizational learning
across the DoD.

       (3) A Defense Service Management Process Assessment Model describing measureable
and assessable levels of integrated service management capabilities.

     (4) Supplemental Defense ITSM Guidance providing additional guidance to support
DoD Components adopting ITSM best practices.

        (5) Guidance that supports acquiring and contracting for ITSM efforts and capabilities
across the DoD based on industry best practices.

    b. The DESMF is reviewed and updated annually, at a minimum, by participants identified
by the DoD CIO. All reviews will include representation from the appropriate DoD
Components, as defined by the DoD CIO and the responsibilities identified within this
instruction.

    c. The DoD CIO will provide a requirements document further describing the required
components of the DESMF. The requirements document is updated annually at a minimum by
participants identified by the DoD CIO to ensure the DESMF remains aligned to DoD’s ITSM
requirements.




                                               7                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                             DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


                                       ENCLOSURE 4

                                        PROCEDURES


1. DESMF CONFORMANCE

   a. The DoD uses a tiered accountability, federation approach, as defined in the “DoD
Enterprise Architecture (EA) Modernization Blueprint/Transition Plan” (Reference (j)), for
implementing ITSM. Under this approach, there are tiered responsibilities for DESMF
conformance assigned to different levels within the DoD.

       (1) The DoD CIO is responsible for developing DoD enterprise ITSM policies and
conformance requirements.

        (2) Each DoD Component is responsible for producing a DoD Component-level ITSM
plan that includes a service measurement and management capability improvement plan aligned
to DoD enterprise IT policies and Reference (j).

        (3) Program managers are responsible for developing program-level architectures and
plans that align with the DoD IEA and DoD Component-level architectures. Additionally, each
program manager will ensure that ITSM activities are incorporated into the program’s
management and planning.

   b. The DoD CIO provides specific standard guidance for IT service description,
measurement, management process description, and ITSM capability assessment. The DoD CIO
provides the necessary oversight to verify that centrally managed capabilities meet the mission
needs of the DoD Components.

    c. Conformance requirements are phased as described in Table 1, DESMF Conformance,
with Phase 1 beginning on the effective date of this instruction. The DoD CIO will determine
the milestones necessary for a program or DoD Component to advance to the next conformance
phase based on organizational capability.

    d. Conformance is assessed by DoD Components against the reporting requirements
established within the latest approved DESMF baseline. Conformance is assessed annually
unless specific programs within the DoD Component are identified by the DoD CIO for more
frequent assessment.




                                               8                               ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                         DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


                                    Table 1. DESMF Conformance

      Service Type           Phase 1 Conformance             Phase 2 Conformance           Phase 3 Conformance
Enterprise IT services     Services and processes          Services and processes        Service quality and
or shared IT services      conform or service              Conform or service            service management
                           provider:                       provider:                     capability are measured
                             Explains why non-               Gains approval for          and evaluated on
                             conforming, provides            exception by DoD CIO,       conformance to the
                             current conformance             provides current            DESMF.
                             level description, and          conformance level
                             provides specific               description, provides
                             recommendations for             specific
                             DESMF improvement               recommendations for
                             that could be conformed         DESMF improvement
                             to if implemented.              that would be conformed
                                                             to if implemented, and
                                                             agrees to DESMF
                                                             improvements
                                                             conformed to after the
                                                             update.
IT services offered to a   Services and processes          Services and processes        Services and processes
single DoD Component       conform or service              conform or service            conform or service
                           provider:                       provider:                     provider:
                             Evaluates DESMF to              Develops plan for             Gains exception
                             inform internal service         prioritizing and adopting     approval, provides
                             measurement and                 DESMF practices,              current conformance
                             management capability           provides current              level description,
                             planning and                    conformance level             provides specific
                             provides specific               description, and              recommendations for
                             recommendations for             provides                      DESMF improvement
                             DESMF improvements.             recommendations for           that would be
                                                             DESMF improvements.           conformed to if
                                                                                           implemented, and
                                                                                           agrees to conform to
                                                                                           DESMF improvements
                                                                                           after the update.



2. DESMF CONTROL PROCEDURES. Changes to the DESMF baseline will be controlled
through the DoD CIO-led Enterprise Architecture and Services Board (EASB) in accordance
with Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (k)). The Enterprise Services and
Data Panel (ESDP), a subordinate board to the EASB, will be the primary forum for receiving,
adjudicating, and incorporating changes into the DESMF.

   a. On a continuous basis, the ESDP will solicit and accept proposed changes to the DESMF
baseline through a working group.

   b. The ESDP will adjudicate the proposed changes to the baseline and once developed,
submit a new baseline for approval by the EASB.




                                                       9                                       ENCLOSURE 4
                                                         DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


   c. Once the DESMF is approved by the EASB, the DESMF will remain as the standard
baseline for ITSM oversight activities and ITSM conformance reporting until the EASB
approves a replacement baseline.

    d. Concurrent with each release of the DESMF, the DoD CIO will translate DESMF content
into specific ITSM conformance reporting requirements.

   e. The DoD CIO will publish the DoD the current and prior DESMF baselines.




                                            10                             ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS



DCMO                 Deputy Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense
DESMF                DoD Enterprise Service Management Framework
DISA                 Defense Information Systems Agency
DoD CIO              Chief Information Officer of the Department of Defense
DoDD                 DoD Directive
DoDI                 DoD Instruction

IG DoD               Inspector General of the Department of Defense
IT                   information technology
ITSM                 information technology service management

JIE                  Joint Information Environment

USD(AT&L)            Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

DESMF. The DoD ITSM framework that provides standards for service description, service
categories, service quality measurements, service management process descriptions, and service
management capability assessment as well as provides ITSM guidance.

IT Enterprise Service. A service that is offered on a communications network by a single
provider to all entities in the DoD Enterprise and is characterized by function performed, service
provider, specific-service offering, and scope of the enterprise served.

IT service. Engagement of the time and effort of a service provider, through the use of IT,
whose primary purpose is to perform an identifiable task, or tasks, rather than provide an end
item of supply.

IT service management. A set of specialized organizational capabilities to manage IT services
through a set of defined, repeatable, measurable, implemented and integrated processes that
control the quality, performance and reliability of IT services.

service. Engagement of the time and effort of a service provider whose primary purpose is to
perform an identifiable task, or tasks, rather than furnish an end item of supply.




                                                 11                                  GLOSSARY
                                                          DoDI 8440.01, December 24, 2015


shared IT service. An IT service that is consumed by more than one DoD Component or another
federal agency.




                                            12                                 GLOSSARY
