                                          Department of Defense

                                                DIRECTIVE
                                                                                            NUMBER 6025.21E
                                                                                           July 5, 2006
                                                               Incorporating Change 1, October 15, 2018

                                                                                                       USD(R&E)

SUBJECT: Medical Research for Prevention, Mitigation, and Treatment of Blast Injuries

References: (a) Section 256 of Public Law 109-163, “National Defense Authorization Act for
                Fiscal Year 2006” 1
            (b) DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002
            (c) DoD Directive 5134.3, “Director of Defense Research and Engineering
                (DDR&E),”November 3, 2003
            (d) DoD Directive 5025.1, “DoD Directives System,” March 2005
            (e) through (g), see Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE

This Directive:

     1.1. Implements Reference (a) by establishing policy and assigning responsibilities
governing coordination and management of medical research efforts and DoD programs related
to prevention, mitigation, and treatment of blast injuries.

     1.2. Designates the Secretary of the Army, in compliance with Reference (a) and consistent
with Reference (b), as the DoD Executive Agent (DoD EA) for Medical Research for Prevention,
Mitigation, and Treatment of Blast Injuries according to Reference (b).

     1.3. Establishes the Armed Services Biomedical Research Evaluation and Management
(ASBREM) Committee. The ASBREM Committee serves to facilitate coordination and prevent
unnecessary duplication of effort within DoD biomedical research and development and
associated enabling research areas, to include serving as the forum for implementation of
subsections (d) and (g) of Reference (a).




1
    Federal legislative information is available through the Library of Congress THOMAS site, http://thomas.loc.gov.
                                                                    DoDD 6025.21E, July 5, 2006


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to:

    2.1. The Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter collectively referred to as the
“DoD Components”).

   2.2. Medical and associated enabling research supported by any DoD Component for
prevention, mitigation, and treatment of blast injuries.


3. DEFINITIONS

As used in this Directive, the following terms are defined as follows:

    3.1. Blast Injury. Injury that occurs as the result of the detonation of high explosives,
including vehicle-borne and person-borne explosive devices, rocket-propelled grenades, and
improvised explosive devices. The blast injury taxonomy is provided at Enclosure 2.

   3.2. Research. Any systematic investigation, including research, development, testing, and
evaluation (RDT&E), designed to develop or contribute to general knowledge.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:

    4.1. DoD research related to blast injury prevention, mitigation, and treatment will be
coordinated and managed by a DoD EA to meet the requirements, objectives, and standards of
the DoD Military Health System as identified by the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel
and Readiness (USD(P&R)) and the unique combat casualty care requirements of the DoD
Components.

   4.2. Relevant research shall take maximum advantage of the scientific and technical
capabilities of industry, academia, DoD Components, and other Federal Agencies.

   4.3. The ASBREM Committee will be the venue for joint and cross-Service coordination
specified by Reference (a).

    4.4. DoD Components will gather and share medical information related to the efficacy of
personal protective equipment and of vehicular equipment designed to protect against blast
injury.




Change 1, 10/15/2018                            2
                                                                      DoDD 6025.21E, July 5, 2006



5. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS

   5.1. The Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E), under the Under
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, according to DoD Directive
5134.3 (Reference (c)), shall:

       5.1.1. Plan, program, and execute the functions and reports mandated for the DDR&E by
Reference (a).

      5.1.2. Have the authority to publish DoD Issuances consistent with Reference (d) for
implementation of this Directive.

        5.1.3. Establish, as needed, procedures to ensure that new technology developed under
this Directive is effectively transitioned and integrated into systems and subsystems and
transferred to and firmly under the control of the DoD Components.

       5.1.4. Chair the ASBREM Committee to coordinate DoD biomedical research (see
Enclosure 3 for additional detail), and employ that entity to facilitate the DoD EA’s coordination
and oversight of blast-injury research as specified in Reference (a).

           5.1.5. Serve as the final approving authority for DoD blast-injury research programs.

       5.1.6. Oversee the functions of the DoD EA and conduct/report on related periodic
assessments (per Reference (a)).

  5.2. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA)), under the
USD(P&R), shall:

        5.2.1. Assist the DDR&E, the DoD EA, and the Director, Joint Improvised Explosive
Devices Defeat Organization (JIEDDO), with identification of related operational and research
needs, assessment of relevant research efforts, and coordination of planning to resolve capability
gaps through focused research efforts.

       5.2.2. Be the approving authority for Military Health System prevention and treatment
standards developed and proposed by the DoD EA.

        5.2.3. Appoint appropriate representatives to related coordinating boards or committees
established by the DoD EA.

       5.2.4. Ensure that the information systems capabilities of the Military Health System
support the DoD EA and the functions specified by this Directive.

           5.2.5. Serve as Co-chair of the ASBREM Committee. (See Enclosure 3 for additional
detail.)




Change 1, 10/15/2018                               3
                                                                    DoDD 6025.21E, July 5, 2006


    5.3. The Secretary of the Army is hereby designated as the DoD EA for Medical Research
for Prevention, Mitigation, and Treatment of Blast Injuries, consistent with Reference (a), to
coordinate and manage relevant DoD research efforts and programs, and in that role shall:

     5.3.1. Give full consideration to the Research and Engineering (R&E) needs of the DoD
Components and the Director, JIEDDO, addressing those needs/requirements by:

            5.3.1.1. Maintaining a DoD technology base for medical research related to blast
injuries and based on the DDR&E-approved program for the DoD Components.

           5.3.1.2. Performing programming and budgeting actions for all blast-injury research
to maintain the R&E programs based on DDR&E-approved priorities of the DoD Components.

             5.3.1.3. Programming and budgeting for blast-injury research based on analysis and
prioritization of needs of the DoD Components, consistent with paragraph 5.1 of this Directive.

         5.3.1.4. Executing the approved DoD blast-injury research program consistent with
DoD guidance and availability of annual congressional appropriations.

        5.3.2. Provide medical recommendations with regard to blast-injury prevention,
mitigation, and treatment standards to be approved by the ASD(HA).

     5.3.3. Coordinate DoD blast-injury-research issues with the staffs of the DDR&E, the
ASD(HA), and the Director, JIEDDO.

        5.3.4. Support the development, maintenance, and usage of a joint database for
collection, analysis, and sharing of information gathered or developed by the DoD Components
related to the efficacy of theater personal protective equipment (including body armor, helmets,
and eyewear) and vehicular equipment designed to protect against blast injury.

     5.3.5. Appoint a medical general or flag officer representative to the ASBREM
Committee.

       5.3.6. Ensure that information is shared as broadly as possible except where limited by
law, policy, or security classification and that data assets produced as a result of the assigned
responsibilities are visible, accessible, and understandable to the rest of the Department as
appropriate and in accordance with Reference (e).

   5.4. The Secretaries of the Navy and the Air Force shall:

     5.4.1. Forward their respective approved blast-injury medical R&E requirements to the
DoD EA for consideration and integration.

        5.4.2. Appoint medical general or flag officer representatives to the ASBREM
Committee and appoint representatives to any other coordination, oversight, or assessment board
established by DDR&E or the DoD EA.



Change 1, 10/15/2018                             4
                                                                             DoDD 6025.21E, July 5, 2006



        5.4.3. Coordinate with other DoD Components on the assignment of Joint Technical
Staff Officers to Army medical research entities, research and acquisition organizations, or
installations for coordination of research programming and execution needs pertaining to their
Component.

        5.4.4. Provide an appropriate system for identification, verification, prioritization, and
headquarters-level approval of their respective blast-injury R&E requirements before submission
to the DoD EA.

   5.5. The President of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences (USUHS),
under the ASD(HA) and USD(P&R), shall:

        5.5.1. Ensure that education relating to blast-injury prevention, mitigation, and treatment
is included in the USUHS medical and continuing education curriculum and programs.

        5.5.2. Appoint a representative to any coordination, oversight, or assessment board
established by DDR&E or the DoD EA.

    5.6. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

       5.6.1. Coordinate input to the DoD EA and ensure integration of the requirements
processes of the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System 2 with the processes
employed under this Directive.

        5.6.2. Appoint a relevant senior representative to the ASBREM Committee.

        5.6.3. Appoint representatives to organizational entities of the ASBREM Committee and
to any other coordination, oversight, or assessment board established by DDR&E or the DoD
EA.

    5.7. The Commander, U.S. Special Operations Command shall establish procedures and
processes for coordination of relevant Defense Major Force Program 11 activities with those
planned, programmed, and executed by the DoD EA and shall also:

       5.7.1. Forward that command’s approved blast-injury R&E requirements for
consideration and integration to the DoD EA.

       5.7.2. Appoint representatives to organizational entities of the ASBREM Committee, as
appropriate, and to any other coordination, oversight, or assessment board established by
DDR&E or the DoD EA.




2
 CJCSI 3170.01E, “Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System,” May 11, 2005, is available at
http://www.dtic.mil/cjcs_directives/cjcs/instructions.htm.


Change 1, 10/15/2018                                   5
                                                                    DoDD 6025.21E, July 5, 2006


       5.7.3. Coordinate with the command on the assignment of Joint Technical Staff Officers
to Army medical research entities, research and acquisition organizations, or installations for
coordination of research programming and execution needs.

        5.7.4. Provide an appropriate system for identification, verification, and headquarters-
level approval of that command’s blast-injury R&E requirements before submission to the DoD
EA.

   5.8. The Director, JIEDDO, consistent with Reference (f), shall:

        5.8.1. Support development, maintenance, and usage of a joint database for collection,
analysis, and sharing of information gathered or developed by DoD Components related to the
efficacy of theater personal protective equipment (e.g., body armor, helmets, and eyewear) and
vehicular equipment designed to protect against blast-injury.

       5.8.2. Appoint representatives to organizational entities of the ASBREM Committee, as
appropriate, and to any other coordination, oversight, or assessment board established by
DDR&E or the DoD EA.

       5.8.3. Assist the DoD EA, the DDR&E, and the ASD(HA) with identification of related
operational and research needs, assessment of relevant research efforts, and coordination of
planning to resolve capability gaps through focused research efforts.


6. AUTHORITY

The DoD EA identified by this Directive is hereby delegated authority to do the following:

   6.1. Obtain reports and information, consistent with the policies and criteria of DoD
Directive 8910.1 (Reference (g)), as necessary, to carry out assigned responsibilities and
functions.

    6.2. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry
out assigned functions, including the transmission of requests for advice and assistance.
Communications to the Military Departments shall be transmitted through the Secretaries of the
Military Departments, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law or directed by the
Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the Commanders of the
Combatant Commands shall normally be transmitted through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.

    6.3. Communicate with other Federal Agencies, representatives of the Legislative Branch,
members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments, as appropriate, in carrying
out assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with representatives of the
Legislative Branch shall be coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative
Affairs and the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, as
appropriate, and be consistent with the DoD Legislative Program.



Change 1, 10/15/2018                            6
                                                               DoDD 6025.21E, July 5, 2006




7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this directive to the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (h)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosures – 3
 E1. References, continued
 E2. Taxonomy of Injuries from Explosive Devices
 E3. ASBREM Committee




Change 1, 10/15/2018                         7
                                                                DoDD 6025.21E, July 5, 2006


                                    E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                  REFERENCES, continued


(e) DoD Directive 8320.2, “Data Sharing in a Net-Centric Department of Defense,” December 2,
    2004
(f) DoD Directive 2000.19E, “Joint Improved Explosive Device Defeat Organization
    (JIEDDO),” February 14, 2006
(g) DoD Directive 8910.1, “Management and Control of Information Requirements,” June 11,
    1993
(h) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary of
    Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018




Change 1, 10/15/2018                          8                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                      DoDD 6025.21E, July 5, 2006


                                        E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                  TAXONOMY OF INJURIES FROM EXPLOSIVE DEVICES


   E2.1.1. Primary. Blast overpressure injury resulting in direct tissue damage from the shock
wave coupling into the body.

    E2.1.2. Secondary. Injury produced by primary fragments originating from the exploding
device (preformed and natural (unformed) casing fragments, and other projectiles deliberately
introduced into the device to enhance the fragment threat); and secondary fragments, which are
projectiles from the environment (debris, vehicular metal, etc.).

    E2.1.3. Tertiary. Displacement of the body or part of body by the blast overpressure causing
acceleration/deceleration to the body or its parts, which may subsequently strike hard objects
causing typical blunt injury (translational injury), avulsion (separation) of limbs, stripping of soft
tissues, skin speckling with explosive product residue and building structural collapse with crush
and blunt injuries, and crush syndrome development.

    E2.1.4. Quaternary. Other “explosive products” effects – heat (radiant and convective), and
toxic, toxidromes from fuel, metals, etc. – causing burn and inhalation injury.

    E2.1.5. Quinary. Clinical consequences of “post detonation environmental contaminants”
including bacteria (deliberate and commensal, with or without sepsis), radiation (dirty bombs),
tissue reactions to fuel, metals, etc.




Change 1, 10/15/2018                              9                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 6025.21E, July 5, 2006


                                      E3. ENCLOSURE 3

                                   ASBREM COMMITTEE


E3.1. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

The ASBREM Committee shall:

  E3.1.1. Consist of general and flag officer and Senior Executive representatives of relevant
DoD Components.

       E3.1.1.1. Standing members include relevant senior officials of the DoD Components.
At a minimum, the DDR&E, the ASD(HA), and representatives of the DoD Components’
Acquisition Executives.

        E3.1.1.2. The standing membership may be expanded by invitation of the Chair when
issues require senior-level coordination outside the scope of the principal members. Such invited
members will include a medical flag officer from the Joint Staff, a designee of the DoD EA
specified by this Directive, the Director, JIEDDO, the Director of the Combating Terrorism
Technology Support Office, and others as appropriate.

  E3.1.2. Be chaired by the DDR&E or Senior Executive designee and co-chaired by the
ASD(HA) or Senior Executive designee.

   E3.1.3. Convene at the discretion of the Chair and Co-chair.

   E3.1.4. Invite the attendance of observers from DoD boards, committees or offices, or from
other Federal Agencies with interests in the deliberations of the ASBREM Committee.

    E3.1.5. Establish subcommittees, Joint Technology Coordinating Groups, and other entities,
as required, to facilitate and execute committee business.


E3.2. FUNCTIONS

The ASBREM Committee shall:

    E3.2.1. Review medical RDT&E program plans and accomplishments for quality, relevance,
and responsiveness to military operational needs, the needs of the Military Health System, and
the goals of Force Health Protection.

    E3.2.2. Review program plans and budgets in support of the various guidance documents
relevant to National Security and to the missions and functions of the Department of Defense.

    E3.2.3. Provide coordination, recommendations, and support to DoD EA(s) and other DoD
officials as requested, directed, or otherwise appropriate.

Change 1, 10/15/2018                           10                        ENCLOSURE 3
