                              Department of Defense
                                     DIRECTIVE

                                                                              NUMBER 4270.5
                                                                              February 12, 2005
                                                        Incorporating Change 1, August 31, 2018

                                                                                           USD(A&S)

SUBJECT: Military Construction

References: (a) DoD Directive 4270.5, “Military Construction Responsibilities,” March 2, 1982
                (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Directive 4270.36, “DoD Emergency, Contingency, and Other
                Unprogrammed Construction Projects,” May 17, 1997 (hereby canceled)
            (c) Chapters 169 and 1803 of title 10, United States Code
            (d) DoD Directive 1315.6, “Responsibilities for Military Troop Construction
                Support of the Department of the Air Force Overseas,” August 26, 1978 (hereby
                canceled)
            (e) MIL-STD-3007B, “Standard Practice for Unified Facilities Criteria and Unified
                Facilities Guide Specifications” April 1, 2002 1
            (f) DoD 7000.14-R, “Financial Management Regulation,” Volume 2, Chapter 6,
                June 2000
            (g) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the
                Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the
                Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive:

    1.1. Reissues and renames reference (a); consolidates the information previously contained
in reference (b); establishes policies and responsibilities for the military construction program
and the use of DoD construction agents in the design or construction of military construction
program facilities (reference (c)); and cancels reference (d).

      1.2. Delegates statutory authorities and responsibilities relating to military construction.



1
    www.acq.osd.mil/ie/irm/irm_library/milstd3007b_042302.pdf
                                                                           DoDD 4270.5, February 12, 2005



2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

   2.1. This Directive applies to:

        2.1.1. The Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments (including the
Reserve components), the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

       2.1.2. Military construction projects that are authorized and funded in military
construction authorization and appropriation acts to support the DoD Components.

        2.1.3. DoD emergency, contingency, and other unprogrammed construction projects not
specifically authorized by military construction authorization or appropriation acts, but
authorized pursuant to other laws, including those cited in reference (c).

    2.2. This Directive does not apply to privatized housing or to projects acquired through a
real property exchange agreement.


3. DEFINITIONS

    3.1. Blanket Agreement. An agreement, as approved by the Deputy Under Secretary of
Defense (Installations and Environment) (DUSD(I&E)), between a DoD Component and the
assigned construction agent allowing the DoD Component to design and construct a class of
projects or a set of associated projects.

   3.2. DoD Construction Agent. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Naval Facilities
Engineering Command, or such other approved DoD activity assigned the design or construction
execution responsibilities associated with the military construction program.

    3.3. Military Department. In accordance with reference (c), for purposes of the Pentagon
Reservation, Washington Headquarters Services shall be considered a Military Department and
its Director is considered the Secretary thereof.

   3.4. United States. The 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, Guam, and the Virgin Islands.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:




Change 1, 08/31/2018                            2
                                                                             DoDD 4270.5, February 12, 2005



    4.1. Construction projects should normally be justified and funded through the planning,
programming, and budgeting process. Authorities in Sections 2803, 2804, 2805, 2808, and 2854
of reference (c) are not included in the normal planning, programming, and budgeting process.

    4.2. Projects shall be considered for funding under authorities available to the Heads of the
DoD Components before being considered for funding under the authority of the Secretary of
Defense. Reprogramming requests to fund projects under Sections 2803, 2805, and 2854 of
reference (c) shall be submitted to the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller).
Reprogramming is not necessary for projects under Sections 2804 and 2808 of reference (c).

    4.3. The United States. Within the United States, design and construction execution of
military facilities, including military family housing construction, unspecified minor military
construction, and those Reserve component facilities constructed by the United States, shall be
accomplished as follows:

        4.3.1. The Army and the Navy. The Department of the Army shall use the services of
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Department of the Navy shall use the services of the
Naval Facilities Engineering Command for the design and construction of military facilities for
their respective Military Departments. Each may use the services of the other Department in the
interest of efficiency and cost-effectiveness or when otherwise considered appropriate.

         4.3.2. The Defense Agencies and the DoD Field Activities. The U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers or the Naval Facilities Engineering Command shall be used in the maintenance, repair,
design, construction, rehabilitation, alteration, addition, and/or expansion of a real property
facility for a Defense Agency or a DoD Field Activity with the approval of the Military
Department having jurisdiction of the real property facility. Another construction agent may be
used when the Secretary of the Military Department having jurisdiction of the Defense Agency
or the DoD Field Activity real property facility so recommends (such alternate construction
agent having been nominated by the Director of the Defense Agency or the Director of the DoD
Field Activity), and the DUSD(I&E) approves the alternate as the most efficient, expeditious,
and cost-effective agent to accomplish the authorized construction. The Director of the Defense
Agency or the Director of the DoD Field Activity shall submit the name of the alternate
construction agent to the Commander of the appropriate DoD construction agent for comment,
the Secretary of the Military Department having jurisdiction of the real property facility, and to
the DUSD(I&E), concurrently.

       4.3.3. The Air Force. The Department of the Air Force shall use the services of the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers or the Naval Facilities Engineering Command for design and
construction of the annual military construction program.

           4.3.3.1. The Air Force may design and construct projects in the annual military
construction program in specific cases where both the Air Force and the Commander of the
assigned construction agent agree that it is the most efficient, expeditious, and cost-effective
means to complete the project.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                              3
                                                                             DoDD 4270.5, February 12, 2005



            4.3.3.2. If the Air Force and the assigned construction agent do not agree on a
specific project, the Air Force may request permission from the DUSD(I&E) to design and
construct the project over the objections of the assigned construction agent. The DUSD(I&E)
shall request the views of the Commander of the assigned construction agent before making a
decision on the Air Force request.

           4.3.3.3. Air Force military family housing normally shall be designed and
constructed directly within the resources and supervision of the Department of the Air Force.

       4.3.4. The Reserve components. The Reserve components shall normally meet the same
requirements as their active component stated in subparagraphs 4.3.1. and 4.3.3. for the design
and construction of facilities covered by Section 18233(a)(l) of reference (c).

             4.3.4.1. The National Guard shall normally use the services of the U.S. Property and
Fiscal Officer for the State in which the facility is located for the design and construction of
facilities covered by Section 18233(a)(1) of reference (c).

             4.3.4.2. The design and construction of National Guard projects covered by Section
18233(a)(2), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of reference (c), shall be accomplished according to the laws of
the State, territory, or possession, and under the supervision of its officials, subject to the
inspection and approval of the DUSD(I&E).

       4.3.5. Other DoD Components. Facilities to be constructed for the other DoD
Components and not addressed in subparagraphs 4.3.3. and 4.3.4. shall be designed and
constructed by the host Military Department’s construction agent.

           4.3.5.1. Such DoD Components may use the services of other qualified agents to
design and construct projects in specific cases where the DoD Component, the host Military
Department, and the Head of the assigned construction agent agree that it is the most efficient,
expeditious, and cost-effective means to complete the project.

            4.3.5.2. If the DoD Component, the host Military Department, and the assigned
construction agent do not agree on a specific project, the DoD Component may request
permission from the DUSD(I&E) to use the services of other qualified agents over the objections
of either the host Military Department or the assigned construction agent. The DUSD(I&E) shall
request the views of the host Military Department and the Head of the assigned construction
agent before making a decision on the DoD Component request.

        4.3.6. Non-DoD Agencies and Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities (NAFIS). The
appropriate DoD construction agent may, at the request and on behalf of non-DoD Agencies
(including NAFIs), provide design and construction assistance for facilities requirements if the
scope of the service does not adversely impact on military construction and national defense
interests, and with the consent of the Military Department having jurisdiction over the real
property facility.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                             4
                                                                            DoDD 4270.5, February 12, 2005



    4.4. Outside the United States. Outside the United States, design and construction execution
of military facilities, including military family housing, shall be accomplished as follows:

      4.4.1. Geographical areas are designated to specific construction agents in enclosure 1.
Unspecified minor military construction in these areas may be executed by the requiring Military
Department or, in the case of a Defense Agency or a DoD Field Activity, by the Military
Department having jurisdiction over the real property facility.

       4.4.2. The assigned DoD construction agent may, at the request and on behalf of non-
DoD Agencies (including NAFIs), provide design and construction assistance for facilities
requirements, if the scope of the services does not adversely impact on military construction and
national defense interests, and provided that the assigned geographical areas of responsibility are
maintained and with the consent of the Military Department having jurisdiction over the real
property facility.

    4.5. Blanket Agreements. Any blanket agreements among the DoD Components reassigning
construction agent responsibility other than as specified in this Directive must be approved by
the Heads of the DoD Components concerned, including, as applicable, the host Military
Department, and by the DUSD(I&E). Such agreements must be re-approved by all parties no
less often than every 5 years.

   4.6. Data Elements. Existing DoD standard data elements shall be used for all data
requirements to the extent possible.

    4.7. The Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC) and the Unified Facilities Guide Specifications
(UFGS). The UFC and the UFGS shall be used to the greatest extent possible by all the DoD
Components for planning, design, and construction (restoration and modernization) of facilities,
regardless of funding source, except for those facilities constructed by the National Guard on real
estate neither owned by the United States nor under long-term lease to the United States,
constructed by a State under reference (c), and where title to the facility shall not be in the
United States. The UFC and UFGS procedures are detailed in MIL-STD-3007B (reference (e)).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    5.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
(USD(AT&L)) is hereby delegated, with authority to re-delegate, the statutory authorities vested
in the Secretary of Defense by reference (c), excluding Sections 2804 and 2808 of reference (c)
which are retained by the Secretary of Defense. The USD(AT&L) shall:

       5.1.1. Exercise general oversight over the military construction program.

        5.1.2. Notify the Office of Management and Budget when the authority of Section 2808
of reference (c) is required in future Executive Orders.

       5.1.3. Coordinate requests to use authorities of Sections 2804 and 2808 of reference (c).



Change 1, 08/31/2018                             5
                                                                             DoDD 4270.5, February 12, 2005




       5.1.4. Ensure that the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Installations and
Environment) shall:

            5.1.5.1. Administer the provisions of this Directive, including issuing implementing
guidance.

            5.1.5.2. Approve the use of a DoD Component or another activity as a DoD
construction agent to exercise the design or construction responsibilities involved in supervision
of contracts for the execution of projects in the DoD military construction program, including
military family housing and Reserve component construction.

            5.1.5.3. Modify the designations of enclosure 1, as necessary.

           5.1.5.4. Certify, pursuant to Section 2858 of reference (c), that additional costs for
expediting construction of a project are necessary to protect the national interest and to establish
a reasonable construction completion date for each such project.

            5.1.5.5. Approve negotiations for the expenditure of funds for cost-plus-fixed-fee
contracts for work to be performed within the United States, except Alaska.

           5.1.5.6. Monitor the execution of the military construction program to ensure the
most efficient, expeditious, and cost-effective accomplishment of the program by DoD
construction agents.

           5.1.5.7. Monitor the use of military units or personnel in the execution of unspecified
minor military construction projects.

           5.1.5.8. Grant approvals pursuant to subparagraphs 4.3.2. through 4.3.4., and
paragraph 4.5.

   5.2. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

        5.2.1. Manage, in accordance with law and DoD policy, their portions of the annual
military construction program, including Reserve component facilities and military family
housing construction.

       5.2.2. Ensure that the use of military personnel in the construction of projects within the
United States is included in the annual military construction program and is in accordance with
DoD 7000.14-R (reference (f)).

   5.3. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

       5.3.1. Forward requests for contingency construction under Section 2804 of reference (c)
through the USD(AT&L) to the Secretary of Defense. Include a DD Form 1391, “Military
Construction Project Data,” with estimated design completion and construction award dates,



Change 1, 08/31/2018                              6
                                                                           DoDD 4270.5, February 12, 2005



completed in accordance with reference (f); a statement of why the authority provided under
Section 2803 of reference (c) is not being used; a statement of need for the project from the
applicable Combatant Command; and a statement that deferral for inclusion in the next military
construction authorization act is inconsistent with national security or the national interest.

       5.3.2. Forward requests for construction supporting war or a national emergency under
Section 2808 of reference (c) through the USD(AT&L) to the Secretary of Defense and indicate
why the facility is needed; include a DD Form 1391, with a description and cost estimate.

       5.3.3. Notify the USD(AT&L) when the need for the authority under Section 2808 of
reference (c) is anticipated.

   5.4. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

       5.4.1. Notify the applicable committees of Congress of exercise-related unspecified
minor military construction outside the United States under the authority of Section 2805 of
reference (c).

       5.4.2. Assign priority among competing requests from the Commanders of the
Combatant Commands for joint exercise-related unspecified minor military construction projects
under Section 2805 of reference (c).

     5.4.3. Approve projects and provide allocated funds to the applicable Commanders of the
Combatant Commands for exercise-related construction.

       5.4.4. Notify the USD(AT&L) when the need for authority under Section 2808 of
reference (c) is anticipated.

       5.4.5. Assign priority among competing requests from the Commanders of the
Combatant Commands for projects under Sections 2804 and 2808 of reference (c) and forward
them to the USD(AT&L).

   5.5. The Commanders of the Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, shall:

       5.5.1. Verify the need for project requests for the use of authority under Section 2804 of
reference (c), and forward them through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the
USD(AT&L).

      5.5.2. Assign priority among competing requests for joint exercise-related unspecified
minor military construction projects under Section 2805 of reference (c) and forward them to the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

       5.5.3. Coordinate and assign priority to requests for projects under Section 2808 of
reference (c) and forward them through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the
USD(AT&L).



Change 1, 08/31/2018                            7
                                                                        DoDD 4270.5, February 12, 2005




6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this Directive to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (reference (g)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 1
   E1. Designated DoD Construction Agents




Change 1, 08/31/2018                          8
                                                                           DoDD 4270.5, February 12, 2005



                                    E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                       DESIGNATED DoD CONSTRUCTION AGENTS


Countries not specifically assigned below shall be designated by the DUSD(I&E). Certain other
countries or locations may have assignments changed as requirements change.


THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY                        THE DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY

Afghanistan                                       Atlantic Ocean area
Canada, excluding Newfoundland                    Australia and New Zealand
Central America                                   Caribbean Sea area
Europe, excluding Spain, Portugal, Italy,         Greece
    Greece, and the British Isles                 Iceland
Northern Eurasia, which makes up Russia and       Indian Ocean area
    the former Soviet republics                   Italy
Greenland                                         Newfoundland
Iraq                                              North Africa, including Somalia and Kenya,
Japan, including the Ryukyu Islands                   but excluding Egypt
    (Okinawa)                                     Pacific Ocean area, including the
Korea                                                 Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas
Marshall Islands                                      Islands, but excluding the Marshall Islands
Mexico                                            Portugal, including the Azores
Middle East, including the Saudi Arabian          Republic of the Philippines
    Peninsula, Egypt, and Israel                  Southeast Asia, from Thailand to Vietnam
South America                                     Spain
Southeast Asia, from Iran to Myanmar
    (Burma)
Sub-Saharan Africa, excluding Kenya and           THE DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
    Somalia
Taiwan                                            British Isles
Turkey




Change 1, 08/31/2018                          9                                    ENCLOSURE 1
