                             Department of Defense
                                   DIRECTIVE

                                                                         NUMBER 5205.15E
                                                                                April 26, 2011
                                                      Incorporating Change 2, October 15, 2018

                                                                                     USD(R&E)

SUBJECT:     DoD Forensic Enterprise (DFE)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by section 113 of
title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (a)), this Directive:

    a. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities within the DoD to develop and maintain an
enduring, holistic, global forensic capability to support the full range of military operations
(ROMO). The DFE consists of those DoD resources, assets, and processes that provide forensic
science analysis linking persons, places, things, and events. These linkages are made in both
traditional law-enforcement and medical purviews, as well as in the expeditionary environment.
The DFE supports numerous customers, including military criminal investigators, medical
examiners, joint force commanders (JFCs), and criminal-intelligence and intelligence analysts.
Not included in the DFE are those distinct, non-traditional missions requiring unique forensic
disciplines that support technical nuclear, technical chemical, and biological disciplines, and
specialized intelligence.

    b. Establishes, under the provisions of DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5105.18 (Reference (b)), the
Forensic Executive Committee (EXCOM) to coordinate the activities of the DFE (see Enclosure
2).

   c. Assigns the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
(USD(AT&L)) the Principal Staff Assistant (PSA) responsibilities pursuant to DoD Directive
(DoDD) 5101.1 (Reference (c)) for the DFE.

    d. Designates the Secretary of the Army as the DoD Executive Agent (EA) for Forensics, in
accordance with Reference (c) for those forensic disciplines relating to deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) (excepting those related to forensic medicine), serology, firearms and tool marks, latent
prints, questioned documents, forensic chemistry, and trace materials.

   e. Designates the Secretary of the Air Force as the DoD EA for Digital and Multimedia
(D/MM) Forensics in accordance with Reference (c) and DoDD 5505.13E (Reference (d)), for
                                                                  DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

those forensics disciplines relating to computer and electronic device forensics, audio forensics,
image analysis, and video analysis.

    f. Assigns to the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), primary responsibility for
intelligence activities and programs related to forensics pursuant to DoDD 5105.21
(Reference (e)).

   g. Cancels the USD(AT&L) Memorandum (Reference (f)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense (IG, DoD), the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD
Components”).

   b. Does not apply to:

        (1) Technical nuclear or technical chemical and biological forensics, including forensic
disciplines that support these efforts, which are distinct, non-traditional missions requiring
unique capabilities that are governed by title 50, U.S.C. (Reference (g)), and DoDDs 5160.05E
and S-2060.04 (References (h) and (i)).

        (2) Specialized intelligence collected through reconnaissance programs by the DoD
offices described at subsection 3.5(h)(7) of Executive Order 12333 (Reference (j)), which
involve the quantitative measurement and interpretation of signatures performed outside the
scope of the Capstone Concept of Operations for DoD Forensics (Reference (k)).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. The Forensic EXCOM shall oversee the implementation of this Directive and facilitate the
coordination of forensic activities throughout DoD.

    b. Enhancement of forensics capabilities within DoD shall minimize redundancies by
leveraging existing capabilities and programs to the fullest extent feasible.

    c. The DoD forensic functions -- recognize, preserve, collect, analyze, store, and share --
shall be conducted in a manner that maximizes consistency and interoperability across the DoD
and at the national and international levels.




Change 2, 10/15/2018                         2
                                                                   DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

   d. Forensic capabilities shall be fully integrated into military operations across the ROMO as
appropriate.

   e. Nothing in this Directive shall supersede the roles and responsibilities of the Heads of the
DoD Components to exercise their authorities pursuant to References (a) and (h) and title 5,
U.S.C. Appendix, also known as “The Inspector General Act of 1978” (Reference (m)).

    f. Individual rights and privacy shall be protected in accordance with applicable laws and
policies. Reference (k), DoDD 5148.13 (Reference (l)), Procedures 1-4 and 7 in DoD Manual
5240.01 (Reference (n)) and Procedure 13 in DoD 5240.1-R (Reference (n)) apply to the
activities of DoD Intelligence Components. Incidents that constitute questionable intelligence
activities and significant or highly sensitive matters shall be reported pursuant to Reference (n).

    g. DoD forensic functions, material, and data collected for forensic analysis and the results
of that forensic analysis shall be protected at the appropriate classification level pursuant to
established security classification guides and DoDI 5200.01 (Reference (o)) to facilitate
information sharing.

    h. Forensic material and data collected pursuant to DoD’s law enforcement mission shall be
protected and handled in accordance with applicable criminal evidentiary standards.

   i. DoD shall, through the Forensic EXCOM, promulgate appropriate enterprise standards for
expeditionary forensic laboratories and personnel performing forensic analyses.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this directive to the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (p)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective April 26, 2011.




Change 2, 10/15/2018                         3
                             DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Forensic EXCOM
   3. Responsibilities
   Glossary




Change 2, 10/15/2018     4
                                                                                              DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

                                                          ENCLOSURE 1

                                                           REFERENCES

(a) Title 10, United States Code
(b) DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
    Management Program,” July 10, 2009, as amended
(c) DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(d) DoD Directive 5505.13E, “DoD Executive Agent (EA) for the DoD Cyber Crime Center
    (DC3),” March 1, 2010
(e) DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(f) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Memorandum,
    “Defense Forensics Executive Steering Group,” January 14, 2008 (hereby cancelled)
(g) Title 50, United States Code
(h) DoD Directive 5160.05E, “Roles and Responsibilities Associated with the Chemical and
    Biological Defense (CBD) Program (CBDP),” October 9, 2008
(i) DoD Directive S-2060.04, “DoD Support to the National Technical Nuclear Forensics
    (NTNF) Program (U),” April 1, 2009
(j) Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981, as
    amended
(k) Director of Defense Research and Engineering, “Capstone Concept of Operations for DoD
    Forensics,” August 5, 2008 1
(l) DoD Directive 5148.13, “Intelligence Oversight,” April 26, 2017
(m) DoD Manual 5240.01, “Procedures Governing the Conduct of DoD Intelligence
    Activities,” August 8, 2016
(n) DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components that
    Affect United States Persons,” December 1982, as amended
(o) DoD Instruction 5200.01, “DoD Information Security Program and Protection of Sensitive
    Compartmented Information,” April 21, 2016
(p) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
    of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(q) DoD Chief Information Officer, “DoD Architecture Framework Version 2.02,” August
    2010
(r) DoD Directive 5530.3, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987, as amended
(s) DoD Directive 2310.07, “Past Conflict Personnel Accounting Policy,” April 12, 2017
(t) DoD Instruction 1400.25, Volume 250, “DoD Civilian Personnel Management System:
    Volume 250, Civilian Strategic Human Capital Planning (SHCP),” June 7, 2016
(u) DoD Directive 5106.01, “Inspector General of the Department of Defense,” April 20, 2012,
    as amended
(v) DoD Instruction 5525.07, “Implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
    Between the Departments of Justice (DoJ) and Defense Relating to the Investigation and
    Prosecution of Certain Crimes,” June 18, 2007
(w) Annex II to National Security Presidential Decision Directive 46/Homeland Security
    Presidential Directive 15, “U.S. Policy and Strategy in the War on Terror” January 4, 2007 2
1
 This document can be accessed by contacting Director, Defense Biometrics and Forensics, USD(AT&L).
2
 These are classified document that can be accessed by contacting the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and
Global Security.
                                                                      5
Change 2, 10/15/2018                                                                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

(x) National Security Presidential Directive 54/Homeland Security Presidential Directive 23,
    “Cyber Security and Monitoring,” January 8, 20082




                                              6
Change 2, 10/15/2018                                                   ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                       FORENSIC EXCOM


1. PURPOSE. The Forensic EXCOM shall oversee the implementation of this Directive and
facilitate the coordination of forensic activities throughout DoD.


2. OBJECTIVES. The objectives of the Forensic EXCOM are to:

    a. Ensure that DoD maintains an enduring, holistic, global forensic capability that includes
an expeditionary capacity, necessary reach back, appropriate forensic expertise, and the
infrastructure needed to support the range of military operations.

    b. Address the evolving needs of DoD forensics to support the ROMO and encourage
collaboration, coordination, and interoperability of forensic activities to modernize, streamline,
and integrate forensic activities across DoD.

    c. Reduce the cost of forensic-related military and business operations and enhance the use
of current resources that maximize value and manage risk.

   d. Identify responsible stakeholders for developing, sourcing, and executing forensic-related
requirements.


3. MEMBERSHIP. The Forensic EXCOM shall be chaired by the USD(AT&L) or a designated
representative. Its membership shall consist of one senior general or flag officer or civilian
equivalent from each of the DoD Components that provide or require forensic capabilities and
support, as well as those making strategic management decisions related to forensic activities.


4. FUNCTIONS. The Forensic EXCOM shall advise and assist the USD(AT&L) in making key
strategic management decisions relating to forensic activities and serve as a forum to:

   a. Coordinate and integrate strategic-level forensic activities within DoD.

   b. Develop strategic-level forensics policy and set programmatic priorities.

    c. Develop clear, objective-associated performance measures and monitor progress toward
fulfilling the objectives set forth in this Directive.

   d. Monitor DFE initiatives and programs to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort.

   e. Recommend changes or additions to the assignment of authorities and responsibilities
within the DFE.

                                                 7
Change 2, 10/15/2018                                                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011




5. RELATIONSHIPS

   a. The Chair shall preside over meetings and shall seek the consensus of committee
members. If resolution or consensus cannot be achieved, the Chair shall serve as the final
decision maker except with respect to matters for which primary responsibility is assigned to
another PSA.

    b. The Chair may invite full or part-time Federal officers or employees from non-DoD
organizations to serve as temporary or full time members as the need arises. Invitees that are
private citizens or representatives from the private sector or non-profit organizations may not
exercise member-like privileges (participating in deliberations and voting specifically) and are
limited to providing his or her individual opinion on technical or expert information to aid in the
deliberation of the membership.

   c. The members shall work closely with the Chair to manage the priorities, plans, programs,
and schedules for work to be jointly accomplished by the DoD Components.




                                                 8
Change 2, 10/15/2018                                                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

                                          ENCLOSURE 3

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L) shall:

   a. Execute the PSA authorities and responsibilities for the DFE pursuant to Reference (c).

    b. In coordination with the members of the Forensic EXCOM, establish the programs and
policies of the DFE.

    c. Appoint a Director for Defense Forensics to coordinate and synchronize forensic
requirements, doctrine, policy, organization, training, material, logistics, architecture, standards,
and funding. The Director for Defense Forensics will be the representative for DoD on forensic-
related matters with other U.S. Government (USG) agencies and international entities as
appropriate.

   d. Oversee the activities of the DoD EAs for Forensics and D/MM Forensics in their
functional areas of responsibility.

   e. Review the adequacy of forensic-related acquisition programs and associated budget
submissions to ensure they meet DFE program requirements and objectives.

   f. Serve as the Chair of the Forensic EXCOM (or designate an alternate), provide
administrative support as needed for its effective operation and establish working groups to
address issues and make recommendations as needed.

    g. Serve as the senior point of contact with other USG agencies and international entities on
forensic capabilities unless otherwise assigned.

   h. Coordinate with the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) on forensic
programs, activities, and agreements that may affect intelligence-related authorities and
missions.

   i. Coordinate and synchronize forensic research, development, test, and evaluation
(RDT&E) efforts among DoD Components and USG agencies that contribute to the DFE.

    j. Coordinate and publish a DFE strategic plan, supported by a communications outreach
plan.

   k. Coordinate with the DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO) on programs, policies,
and activities pertaining to D/MM forensics.

   l. Unless otherwise assigned, establish and maintain forensic information-sharing
agreements with non-DoD organizations.



Change 2, 10/15/2018                          9                             ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011



  m. Oversee the development and integration of the DFE architecture in accordance with the
DoD Architecture Framework Version 2.02 (Reference (q)).


2. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall:

   a. Review and endorse interagency cooperation agreements for DoD forensic activities as
appropriate and exercise the responsibilities prescribed in DoDD 5530.3 (Reference (r))
regarding international cooperative agreements.

    b. Serve as the principal advisor to the USD(AT&L) for personnel accounting and personnel
recovery programs, activities, and agreements that may affect the DFE.

    c. Establish policy, monitor and evaluate program performance, and provide guidance with
respect to all DoD DFE activities related to efforts to account for personnel unaccounted for
pursuant to DoDD 2310.07 (Reference (s)).


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall:

   a. Serve as the principal advisor to the USD(AT&L) on forensic medicine disciplines.

   b. Participate in forensic committees when issues related to human capital management are
addressed.

    c. Coordinate with the appropriate Functional Community Manager, pursuant to Volume 250
of DoDI 1400.25 (Reference (t)), on civilian human capital management planning issues,
including those dealing with the civilian expeditionary workforce.

    d. Establish policy, monitor and evaluate program performance and provide guidance with
respect to all DoD DFE activities related to forensic medicine disciplines.


4. USD(I). The USD(I) shall:

  a. Serve as the principal advisor to the USD(AT&L) on intelligence activities affecting the
DFE.

    b. Direct policy development and implementation for the application of forensics to defense
intelligence, counterintelligence, and established security requirements, as needed.

    c. Establish and oversee all Defense Intelligence Component plans, programs, and budgets
that support the intelligence requirements of the DFE; disseminate implementing guidance for
intelligence programs and activities to support forensics.



Change 2, 10/15/2018                       10                           ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011



    d. In conjunction with the DoD CIO, ensure that forensic-derived intelligence information is
accessible through an intelligence-sharing environment to tactical and operational users as well
as the USG-wide intelligence, counterintelligence, foreign intelligence, and security communities
as appropriate under existing policy and statutes.

    e. Coordinate with the USD(AT&L) on intelligence programs, activities, and agreements
that may affect the DFE.


5. DIRECTOR, DIA. The Director, DIA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I), and in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Serve as the intelligence lead for forensic activities and programs.

    b. Coordinate with the DoD EAs for Forensics and D/MM Forensics on intelligence
activities and programs that may affect forensic-related authorities and missions.

   c. Establish and coordinate intelligence-related forensic mission area applications among the
Defense Intelligence Component and DoD EAs for Forensics and D/MM Forensics.

    d. Propose implementing guidance for the USD(I) directing the application of forensic
resources to support intelligence, collection, processing, analysis, and production in partnership
with other Defense Intelligence Components.

   e. Develop joint intelligence doctrine for intelligence-related forensics functions.

   f. Coordinate with the other members of the Forensic EXCOM to establish, incorporate, and
maintain intelligence-sharing agreements related to forensics with foreign partners, as
appropriate.

    g. Provide intelligence-related training and professional certification activities that support
the DFE.

    h. Program and budget for expeditionary forensic laboratory capability to support
intelligence requirements not otherwise provided by the DoD EAs for Forensics and D/MM
Forensics.

    i. Develop, maintain, and publish the forensics security classification guide for the DoD.
Nothing in the forensic security classification guide will supersede existing classification guides
pertaining to forensic products produced by the DoD community.

    j. Develop, maintain, and publish a list of existing and potential security threats to DoD
forensic technologies and systems.




Change 2, 10/15/2018                         11                              ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

6. DoD CIO. The DoD CIO shall:

   a. Provide policy oversight and guidance for information systems and networks necessary to
support the DFE.

  b. Coordinate with the USD(AT&L) on programs, policies, and activities pertaining to the
DoD Cyber Crime Center, as they relate to the DFE, pursuant to Reference (e).


7. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM AGENCY (DISA). The Director,
DISA, under the authority, direction, and control of the DoD CIO and in addition to the
responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure, shall provide engineering and technical support to
the EAs as they establish and maintain their required forensics information management systems.


8. IG, DoD. The IG, DoD, in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

  a. Serve as the principal advisor to the Chair of the Forensic EXCOM on matters related to
DoD criminal investigation programs.

    b. Establish policy, monitor and evaluate program performance, and provide guidance with
respect to all DoD DFE activities related to criminal investigation programs pursuant to DoDD
5106.01 (Reference (u)) and DoDI 5525.07 (Reference (v)).


9. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of DoD Components shall:

   a. Consult and coordinate with the USD(AT&L) on the establishment of programs and
development of policies affecting the DFE.

   b. Designate representatives to participate in the Forensic EXCOM pursuant to section 4 of
Enclosure 2.

    c. Coordinate and integrate strategies, concepts, capabilities, and requirements regarding
forensic matters within the framework of the Forensic EXCOM to meet forensic requirements
and to prevent unnecessary duplication of forensic activities.

   d. Formulate and execute forensic program elements for forensic activities in respective
budgets.

    e. Field forensics capabilities to meet warfighter needs in accordance with the established
strategic-level policy and programmatic priorities.

   f. Negotiate and resolve forensics issues on behalf of their Components.

   g. Ensure DFE activities are incorporated into Military Service exercises.



Change 2, 10/15/2018                        12                            ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011



   h. Comply with standards, processes, and procedures established by the DoD EAs for
Forensics and D/MM Forensics as appropriate.

    i. Ensure that Component-level forensic training programs are developed, implemented, and
validated in coordination with the DoD EAs for Forensics or D/MM Forensics, as appropriate.


10. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. The Secretary of the Army, in addition to the
responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall serve as the DoD EA for Forensics for all
forensic disciplines specified by paragraph 1.d. above the signature of this Directive, and in that
capacity shall, for the forensic disciplines under his or her purview:

    a. Execute DoD EA responsibilities in accordance with applicable law, Reference (c), and
this Directive.

   b. Coordinate with the Heads of the DoD Components to:

       (1) Execute the responsibilities and activities assigned in this Directive.

       (2) Program for and budget sufficient resources to support common forensic
requirements for the forensic disciplines for which the Secretary of the Army is the DoD EA.

       (3) Ensure that traditional and battlefield (including expeditionary and reach-back)
forensic capabilities are planned, programmed, budgeted, and provided to support the JFCs.

       (4) Establish appropriate standards, processes, and procedures for the forensic disciplines
for which the Secretary of the Army is the DoD EA.

        (5) Establish and maintain training, professional certification, and RDT&E programs for
the forensics disciplines for which the Secretary of the Army is the DoD EA.

        (6) Develop and maintain the DFE architecture pursuant to Reference (q) for the forensic
disciplines for which the Secretary of the Army is the DoD EA.

    c. Coordinate with the Director, DIA, on forensic activities and programs that may affect
intelligence-related authorities and missions.

    d. Designate a DoD Center of Excellence to promote collaboration and the application of
best practices for those forensics disciplines for which the Secretary of the Army is the DoD EA
and ensure they:

       (1) Develop appropriate standards, processes, and procedures.

       (2) Develop and maintain examiner training and professional certification, and
laboratory accreditation.



Change 2, 10/15/2018                         13                            ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011



     (3) Provide integration of joint operational RDT&E of new forensics capabilities to the
DoD Components in support of the JFC.

    e. Develop and maintain continuity of operations and disaster recovery plans for forensic-
related missions and capabilities for which the Secretary of the Army is the DoD EA.

    f. Establish and maintain DoD authoritative data repositories and/or develop guidelines to
interface with existing authoritative data repositories for those forensic disciplines for which the
Secretary of the Army is the DoD EA. Ensure data within these repositories is accessible to
strategic, operational, and tactical users across security domains.

    g. Provide forensic support to the Department of Justice (DOJ) in support of DoD
responsibilities pursuant to Annex II to National Security Presidential Decision Directive
46/Homeland Security Presidential Directive 15 (Reference (w)).

    h. Establish and maintain forensic information-sharing agreements within the DoD for those
forensic disciplines for which the Secretary of the Army is the DoD EA.

    i. Establish and maintain a defense forensics information-sharing capability to support the
forensic disciplines within the DFE for which the Secretary of the Army is the DoD EA. This
capability will be hosted on the Defense Information Systems Network (DISN) and compliant
with Federal and DoD CIO policies and guidance.


11. SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. The Secretary of the Air Force, in addition to the
responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall serve as the DoD EA for D/MM Forensics
and in that capacity shall:

    a. Execute DoD EA responsibilities in accordance with applicable law, Reference (c), and
this Directive.

   b. Coordinate with the Heads of the DoD Components to:

       (1) Execute the responsibilities and activities assigned in this Directive.

       (2) Program for and budget sufficient resources to support common forensic
requirements for those disciplines for which the Secretary of the Air Force is the DoD EA.

       (3) Establish appropriate standards, processes, and procedures for the forensic disciplines
for which the Secretary of the Air Force is the DoD EA.

        (4) Establish and maintain training, professional certification, and RDT&E programs for
the forensic disciplines for which the Secretary of the Air Force is the DoD EA.




Change 2, 10/15/2018                         14                             ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

        (5) Develop and maintain the DFE architecture pursuant to Reference (q) for the forensic
disciplines for which the Secretary of the Air Force is the DoD EA.

    c. Coordinate with the Director, DIA, on forensic activities and programs that may affect
intelligence-related authorities and missions.

   d. Designate a Center of Excellence to promote collaboration and the application of best
practices for those forensics disciplines for which the Secretary of the Air Force is the EA and
ensure they:

       (1) Develop appropriate standards, processes, and procedures.

       (2) Develop and maintain examiner training and professional certification, and
laboratory accreditation.

     (3) Provide integration of joint operational RDT&E of new forensics capabilities to the
DoD Components in support of the JFC.

    e. Develop and maintain continuity of operations and disaster recovery plans for forensic-
related missions and capabilities for which the Secretary of the Air Force is the DoD EA.

    f. Establish and maintain DoD authoritative data repositories and/or develop guidelines to
interface with existing authoritative data repositories for those forensic disciplines for which the
Secretary of the Air Force is the DoD EA. Ensure data within these repositories is accessible to
strategic, operational, and tactical users across security domains.

   g. Provide forensic support to the DOJ in support of DoD responsibilities pursuant to
Reference (w).

    h. Establish and maintain forensics information-sharing agreements within DoD for those
forensic disciplines for which the Secretary of the Air Force is the DoD EA.

   i. Establish and maintain a defense forensics information-sharing capability to support
D/MM forensics within the DFE. This capability shall be hosted on the DISN and compliant
with Federal and DoD CIO policies and guidance.

  j. Support DoD responsibilities pursuant to National Security Presidential Directive 54/
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 23 (Reference (x)).


12. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Review and assess the adequacy of forensic acquisition programs and budgets to support
joint objectives and operational plans and ensure the integration of forensics into strategic and
operational plans and training as applicable.



Change 2, 10/15/2018                         15                             ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011



   b. Coordinate Combatant Commanders’ requirements and arrangements associated with
such requirements to the DoD EAs for Forensics or D/MM Forensics, as appropriate, in order to
support and facilitate national military objectives across the ROMO.

   c. Develop operational joint doctrine related to forensic capabilities.

   d. Validate joint requirements for forensics capabilities for the joint force.

   e. Coordinate theater-specific requirements for forensic capabilities.

   f. Represent the forensics program interest of the Combatant Commanders.

   g. Coordinate with the Forensics EXCOM and the DoD EAs for Forensics or D/MM
Forensics as appropriate to ensure the forensics capability supports National Military Strategy
and Combatant Commander requirements.


13. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and in addition to the
responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Identify, validate, and prioritize theater-specific requirements related to the DFE and
submit them to the Joint Staff for coordination.

    b. Integrate appropriate aspects of the DFE into plans, policies, and joint force headquarters
training and exercises.

   c. Provide DFE lessons learned to the Joint Staff.




Change 2, 10/15/2018                        16                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

                                          GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


DFE                    DoD Forensics Enterprise
DIA                    Defense Intelligence Agency
DISA                   Defense Information System Agency
DISN                   Defense Information Systems Network
D/MM                   digital and multimedia
DNA                    deoxyribonucleic acid
DoD CIO                DoD Chief Information Officer
DODD                   DoD Directive
DODI                   DoD Instruction
DODM                   DoD Manual
DOJ                    Department of Justice


EA                     Executive Agent
EXCOM                  Executive Committee


IG DoD                 Inspector General of the Department of Defense


JFC                    joint force commander


PSA                    Principal Staff Assistant


RDT&E                  research, development, test, and evaluation
ROMO                   range of military operations


U.S.C.                 United States Code
USD(AT&L)              Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)               Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


Change 2, 10/15/2018                        17                            GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

USG                    United States Government


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

authoritative data repository. The primary DoD-approved repository of information.

business operations. The policies, processes, information, and systems related to the end-to-end
financial, logistical, facility management, human capital, acquisition, administrative, and other
such functions of the DoD that support the warfighter.

DFE. The DoD resources, assets, and processes required to provide forensic capabilities in
support of DoD operations.

D/MM forensics. The application of computer science and investigative procedures involving
the examination of D/MM material. D/MM forensics is derived from a combination of
definitions as it applies across the spectrum of computer forensics, audio forensics, image
analysis, and video analysis.

    computer and electronic device forensics. A sub-discipline of D/MM forensics that involves
the scientific examination, analysis, and/or evaluation of digital and electronic materials.

   audio forensics. A sub-discipline of D/MM forensics that involves the scientific
examination, analysis, comparison, and/or evaluation of audio.

    image analysis. A sub-discipline of D/MM forensics that involves the application of image
science and domain expertise to examine and interpret the content of an image and/or the image
itself.

   video analysis. A sub-discipline of D/MM forensics that involves the scientific examination,
comparison, and/or evaluation of video.

forensic science (often shortened to forensics). The application of multidisciplinary scientific
processes to establish facts.

multimedia. The use of different formats for presenting information to convey information and
content that utilizes a combination of different content forms. The term can be used as a noun (a
medium with multiple content forms) or as an adjective describing a medium as having multiple
content forms. The term is used in contrast to media that only utilize traditional forms of printed
or hand-produced material. Multimedia includes a combination of text, audio, still images,
animation, video, and interactivity content forms, often packaged on compact disk-read only
memory with links to the Internet.




Change 2, 10/15/2018                         18                               GLOSSARY
                                                                DoDD 5205.15E, April 26, 2011

questioned documents. Documents that undergo a forensic document examination to include the
analysis and comparison of questioned handwriting, hand printing, typewriting, commercial
printing, photocopies, papers, inks, and other documentary items with known material in order to
establish the authenticity of the contested material as well as the detection of alterations.

ROMO. The spectrum of operations in which the future joint force is expected to engage.

U.S.-based forensics laboratories. Those DoD laboratories based in the United States that
perform forensic analysis to support the Department’s full range of military operations. These
labs include:

   Defense Forensic Science Center
   Defense Computer Forensics Laboratory
   Armed Forces Medical Examiner System
   Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency laboratories




Change 2, 10/15/2018                       19                               GLOSSARY
