                            Department of Defense
                                   DIRECTIVE

                                                                        NUMBER 6490.02E
                                                                             February 8, 2012
                                                      Incorporating Change 2, August 28, 2017

                                                                                    USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Comprehensive Health Surveillance

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 6490.02E (Reference (a)) and incorporates and cancels
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (b)).

    b. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for routine, comprehensive health
surveillance of all DoD personnel throughout their military service or DoD civilian employment.

    c. Establishes the Armed Forces Health Surveillance Center (AFHSC) as the single source
for DoD-level health surveillance information.

    d. Designates the Secretary of the Army as the DoD Executive Agent (EA) for the AFHSC
in accordance with DoDD 5101.1 (Reference (c)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD
Components”).

  b. The DoD Expeditionary Civilian (DoD-EC) workforce, consistent with Directive-type
Memorandum 17-004 (Reference (d)).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.
                                                                DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012



4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Comprehensive health surveillance is an important element of force health protection
(FHP) programs to promote, protect, and restore the physical and mental health of DoD
personnel throughout their military service and employment, both in garrison and during
deployment, consistent with Reference (d) and DoDD 4715.1E (Reference (e)).

    b. Comprehensive, continuous, and consistent health surveillance shall be conducted by the
Military Services to implement early intervention and control strategies using technologies,
practices, and procedures in a consistent manner across the DoD Components pursuant to this
Directive.

    c. Medical surveillance systems shall continuously capture data about individual and
population health status, instances of disease and injury, medical interventions (such as
immunizations, treatments, and medications), stress-induced casualties, combat casualties, and
medical evacuations to permit analysis, interpretation, and reporting of population-based
information for identifying, characterizing, and countering threats to the DoD population’s
health, well-being, and performance.

    d. Health surveillance systems shall continuously capture data on occupational and
environmental exposures to potential and actual health hazards and link with medical
surveillance data to monitor the health of the DoD’s population and identify potential risks to
health, thereby enabling timely interventions to prevent, treat, or control disease and injury and
reinforce the provision of optimal medical care.

    e. Medical and personnel information systems, to include Reserve Components and DoD
civilians, shall be designed, integrated, and utilized so as to be compatible with military health
surveillance objectives.

    f. Health surveillance activities shall be prioritized based upon the greatest beneficial impact
on commanders’ FHP planning, response, and decision making.

    g. There shall be a DoD Serum Repository (DoDSR) for future clinical diagnosis and sero-
epidemiologic studies. The DoDSR shall be used for the identification, prevention, and control
of diseases associated with military and DoD-EC service.

   h. Applicable health surveillance activities shall include DoD-EC, in accordance with
Reference (d), directly supporting deployed forces. Health surveillance shall also include
dependents residing either in garrison or overseas with their military sponsor during a possible
exposure or public health event.

   i. Medical and health surveillance data collected on individual Service members shall be
provided to the Department of Veterans Affairs upon their separation or retirement (or when
specifically requested and agreed to) from the military.




Change 2, 08/28/2017                             2
                                                              DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012


    j. Health and medical surveillance information collected, used, and released in the execution
of this Directive shall be protected as required by DoDD 5400.11 (Reference (f)), DoD 5400.11-
R (Reference (g)) and DoD 6025.18-R (Reference (h)).

5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. INFORMATION CAPABILITIES. See Enclosure 3.


7. INFORMATION COLLECTIONS REQUIREMENTS. The health surveillance data
collected for the purposes of monitoring the individual and collective health of the DoD
population before, during, and following deployment operations referred to in this issuance is
exempt from licensing requirements in accordance with Volume 1 of DoD Manual 8910.01
(Reference (i)), according to subparagraph C4.4.10.


8. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective February 8, 2012.




                                                 Ashton B. Carter
                                                 Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Information Capabilities
Glossary




Change 2, 08/28/2017                            3
                                                          DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 6490.02E, “Comprehensive Health Surveillance,” October 21, 2004 (hereby
      cancelled)
(b)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishing an Armed Forces Health
      Surveillance Center,” February 26, 2008 (hereby cancelled)
(c)   DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(d)   Directive-type Memorandum 17-004, “Department of Defense Expeditionary Civilian
      Workforce,” January 25, 2017
(e)   DoD Directive 4715.1E, “Environment, Safety, and Occupational Health (ESOH),” March
      19, 2005
(f)   DoD Directive 5400.11, “DoD Privacy Program,” October 29, 2014
(g)   DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(h)   DoD 6025.18-R, “DoD Health Information Privacy Regulation,” January 24, 2003
(i)   DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
      DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(j)   DoD Directive 5136.01, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA)),”
      September 30, 2013
(k)   DoD Instruction 6420.01, “National Center for Medical Intelligence (NCMI),” March 20,
      2009, as amended
(l)   DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
      Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(m)   DoD Instruction 6200.03, “Public Health Emergency Management Within the Department
      of Defense,” March 5, 2010, as amended
(n)   DoD Directive 6200.04, “Force Health Protection (FHP),” October 9, 2004




Change 2, 08/28/2017                         4                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)). The
ASD(HA), through the Director, Defense Health Agency (DHA), under the authority, direction,
and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), and
pursuant to DoDD 5136.01 (Reference (j)) and consistent with Reference (e), shall:

   a. Exercise overall responsibility for comprehensive health surveillance, issue guidance as
necessary to implement the policies of this Directive, and monitor the implementation of this
Directive and implementing guidance.

   b. Ensure effective medical and health surveillance activities throughout the DoD.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
(ASD(M&RA)). The ASD(M&RA), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), shall:

    a. Implement programs and procedures to assist accomplishment of overall health
surveillance.

   b. Evaluate and recommend changes or improvements to the overall health surveillance
program to the ASD(HA).


3. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR CIVILIAN PERSONNEL
POLICY (DASD(CPP)). The DASD(CPP), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), shall ensure that the policies for the DoD-EC are consistent with the health
surveillance policies established for the Military Services.


4. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)). The USD(I) shall:

    a. Ensure that the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, through the National Center for
Medical Intelligence (NCMI) and in accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 6420.01
(Reference (k)), provides timely warning and projection of significant infectious disease and
environmental health risks to U.S. personnel abroad and within the United States; analysis of
foreign developments in life science technology and countermeasure development; and analysis
on health trends, foreign health diplomacy, military and civilian health system capabilities, and
biosafety and biosecurity policies.




Change 2, 08/28/2017                            5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012


    b. Provide, through the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, environmental assessments
for use in planning health surveillance activities.


5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L) shall, consistent with References (e) and DoDD
5134.01 (Reference (l)), align the environment, safety, and occupational and environmental
health programs with comprehensive health surveillance activities.


6. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

   a. Implement programs and procedures to ensure compliance with this Directive and
implementing guidance.

   b. Provide appropriate medical support and training, equipment, and supplies to implement
health and medical surveillance within and, where applicable, jointly across their respective
Components.

   c. Evaluate and recommend changes or improvements to the overall health surveillance
program to the ASD(HA).

   d. Implement programs and procedures to collect, interpret, report, and archive garrison and
deployment occupational and environmental health surveillance data.

   e. Utilize the Electronic Surveillance System for the Early Notification of Community-Based
Epidemics for routine surveillance and outbreak detection, in accordance with DoDI 6200.03
(Reference (m)). Implement procedures to report disease incidences or outbreaks constituting a
public health emergency, or defined as a Tri-Service Reportable Event. The Tri-Service
Reportable Event list is officially posted by the AFHSC.

   f. Implement programs to provide surveillance of deployer health assessments in accordance
with DoDD 6200.04 (Reference (n)).

    g. Support the DoD EA for AFHSC by jointly resourcing the AFHSC to adequately support
its mission.

    h. Establish career paths for epidemiologists that recognize the key contributions of such
professionals and provides access to appropriate career-broadening opportunities.


7. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. The Secretary of the Army, in addition to the
responsibilities in section 6 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Serve as the DoD EA for the AFHSC:




Change 2, 08/28/2017                            6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012


      (1) Providing oversight in conjunction with an advisory Board of Governors representing
the DoD Components.

       (2) Providing a supporting work force and facilities for the AFHSC with funding through
the Defense Health Program.

   b. Provide for the collection and archiving of all DoD deployment occupational and
environmental health surveillance data and reports.


8. CJCS. The CJCS, in addition to the responsibilities in section 6 of this enclosure, and in
coordination with the Commanders of the Combatant Commands, shall monitor the
implementation of the policies of this Directive and implementing guidance, and provide
Combatant Command operational requirements information to AFHSC and NCMI, to assist them
in refining processes and products.


9. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, in addition to the responsibilities in section 6 of this enclosure, and in
coordination with the CJCS, shall ensure that the policies of this Directive and implementing
guidance are executed during all operations, and provide Combatant Command operational
requirements information to AFHSC and NCMI, to assist them in refining processes and
products.


10. DIRECTOR, AFHSC. The Director, AFHSC shall:

   a. Provide DoD-level strategic health surveillance.

   b. Acquire and integrate all relevant population data, health event data, and exposure data
from across the Services.

   c. Maintain central health surveillance databases, registries, and archives in order to detect
and characterize natural, accidental, and deliberate threats to physical, mental, and dental health;
operational effectiveness; and general well-being of military and military-associated populations.

   d. Develop, analyze, and report timely, actionable health surveillance information for
commanders, policy makers, planners, health care providers, researchers, and others on known,
emerging, and potential health threats. When appropriate, conduct these actions in consultation
with NCMI.

   e. Establish and refine standardized, reproducible DoD health surveillance methods.

   f. Track compliance and effectiveness of health surveillance data collection and reporting
requirements.




Change 2, 08/28/2017                             7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012


   g. Provide appropriate access to health surveillance data for both DoD and external analysts
and researchers and serve as a focal point for sharing AFHSC products and expertise.

    h. Establish a process to validate methods and results to assure consensus within the DoD,
and to provide explanation(s) for any limitations or uncertainty in AFHSC products in a method
that is intelligible to DoD leaders, Congress, and the public.

    i. Coordinate roles, methods of information sharing, and mutually supportive relationships
among the Military Services’ health surveillance organizations; other DoD health surveillance
activities; Service installation-level health surveillance functions; and non-DoD organizations
(local, State, national, and international health organizations).

    j. Serve as a primary proponent for health surveillance training and education by providing
and promoting educational and training opportunities in techniques and practices of
epidemiology and surveillance.

    k. Maintain and operate the Defense Medical Surveillance System (DMSS), the DoDSR, and
the Global Emerging Infections Surveillance and Response System (GEIS).




Change 2, 08/28/2017                            8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                INFORMATION CAPABILITIES


Paragraphs a through e of this enclosure list the information technology capabilities required to
carry out the responsibilities specified in his Directive:

   a. The ability to collect, retrieve, store, and archive self-reported assessments on deploying,
deployed, or recently returned DoD personnel in the electronic health record.

    b. The ability to collect, retrieve, store, and archive medical information, pertaining to
individuals treated in the Military Health System (MHS), in an electronic system that may have
limited or intermittent connectivity to the Internet.

    c. The ability to collect, retrieve, store, and archive occupational and environmental health
information in an electronic system that may have limited or intermittent connectivity to the
Internet.

    d. The ability to synchronize the medical or environmental information with the MHS
electronic health record when connectivity to the Internet is established.

   e. The ability to conduct medical and environmental surveillance for diseases and hazards,
and report as requested or alert when relevant threshold criteria are met.




Change 2, 08/28/2017                             9                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                            DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012


                                        GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AFHSC            Armed Forces Health Surveillance Center
ASD(HA)          Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs
ASD(M&RA)        Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs


CJCS             Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


DASD(CPP)        Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Civilian Personnel Policy
DHA              Defense Health Agency
DMSS             Defense Medical Surveillance System
DoD-EC           DoD Expeditionary Civilian (workforce)
DoDD             DoD Directive
DoDI             DoD Instruction
DoDSR            DoD Serum Repository


EA               Executive Agent


FHP              Force health protection


GEIS             Global Emerging Infections Surveillance and Response System


MHS              Military Health System


NCMI             National Center for Medical Intelligence


USD(AT&L)        Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I)           Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P&R)         Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness




Change 2, 08/28/2017                         10                                 GLOSSARY
                                                               DoDD 6490.02E, February 8, 2012



                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

comprehensive military health surveillance. Health surveillance conducted throughout Service
members’ military careers and DoD civilian employees’ employment, across all duty locations,
and encompassing risk, intervention, and outcome data. Such surveillance is essential to the
evaluation, planning, and implementation of public health practice and prevention and must be
closely integrated with the timely dissemination of information to those who can act upon it.

DMSS. An executive information system whose database contains up-to-date and historical data
on diseases and medical events (e.g., hospitalizations, ambulatory visits, reportable diseases,
Human Immunodeficiency Virus tests, acute respiratory diseases, and health risk appraisals) and
longitudinal data on personnel and deployments.

DoDSR. A repository used for the identification, prevention, and control of diseases associated
with military and DoD-EC service. The mission of the DoDSR for medical surveillance is for
future clinical diagnosis and sero-epidemiologic studies.

GEIS. A system that serves FHP by countering infectious diseases. GEIS conducts prioritized
surveillance and response for emerging, and re-emerging, infectious diseases within the military
and in select foreign civilian populations through DoD overseas medical research laboratories.
GEIS focuses on diseases that threaten U.S. forces and their families, including newly appearing
infectious agents or well-known agents that are increasing in incidence or geographic range.

health surveillance. The regular or repeated collection, analysis, and interpretation of health-
related data and the dissemination of information to monitor the health of a population and to
identify potential risks to health, thereby enabling timely interventions to prevent, treat, or
control disease and injury. It includes occupational and environmental health surveillance and
medical surveillance.

medical surveillance. The ongoing, systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of data
derived from instances of medical care or medical evaluation, and the reporting of population-
based information for characterizing and countering threats to a population’s health, well-being,
and performance.

occupational and environmental health surveillance. The regular or repeated collection, analysis,
archiving, interpretation, and dissemination of occupational and environmental health-related
data for monitoring the health of, or potential health hazard impact on, a population and
individual personnel, and for intervening in a timely manner to prevent, treat, or control the
occurrence of disease or injury when determined necessary.

United States. The physical region that includes the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii,
United States possessions and territories, and surrounding territorial waters and airspace.




Change 2, 08/28/2017                             11                                  GLOSSARY
