                             Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 3200.19
                                                                                  May 17, 2012
                                                        Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018

                                                                                      USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:     Non-Lethal Weapons (NLW) Human Effects Characterization

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5134.01 (Reference
(a)), this Instruction:

   a. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for a human effects
characterization process in support of the development of NLW, non-lethal technologies, and
NLW systems.

    b. Establishes the Human Effects Review Board (HERB) in accordance with DoD
Instruction (DoDI) 5105.18 (Reference (b)) as an independent DoD board to ensure appropriate
scientific processes are used to characterize the human effects of all DoD NLW programs.

    c. Establishes the Human Effects Readiness Level (HERL) as a measure of the availability,
sufficiency, and maturity of data and information of the human effects of NLW.

    d. Establishes health care capability (HCC) indexes as a basis to determine the risk of
significant injury (RSI) from NLW.

   e. Focuses on the human effects on NLW targets. Effects of weapons on operators are
covered in other DoD procedures as required.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD
Components”).

   b. Requirements development for NLW.
                                                                     DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012



   c. Research, development, test, evaluation, and acquisition of all NLW within the Defense
Acquisition System in accordance with DoDD 5000.01 (Reference (c)).

  d. NLW human effects characterization data, reports, and related products that will inform
NLW training and demonstration policies and employment decisions.

    e. NLW research independent of the budget activities funding the research, the mission of
the DoD organization conducting or supporting the research, the security classification of the
research, the location of the research in the United States or a foreign country, or whether the
research is conducted or supported under a program that is not considered research for other
purposes.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. NLW are intended to have relatively reversible effects (see Glossary) and minimize risk of
fatalities, permanent injuries, or permanent damage to materiel; however, they shall not be
required to have a zero probability of producing these effects in accordance with DoD Directive
3000.03E (Reference (d)).

    b. Characterization of the human effects of NLW shall be conducted during the materiel
development process to assess the likelihood of achieving the desired effect(s) and identify RSI
for counter-personnel systems, as well as the RSI for collateral damage to humans from counter-
materiel systems.

   c. The RSI for any given weapon shall be identified by the combat developer to assist in
materiel development and enable force commanders to understand the potential risks associated
with the use of specific NLW.

   d. NLW programs that involve animal subjects shall comply with DoD Instruction 3216.01
(Reference (e)) and implementing DoD Component issuances.

   e. NLW programs that involve human subjects shall comply with DoD Instruction 3216.02
(Reference (f)) and implementing DoD Component issuances.

    f. Secrecy oaths or other non-disclosure agreements will not be used to inhibit veterans from
discussing health concerns with their doctors or seeking compensation from the Department of
Veterans Affairs for potential service-related disabilities.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             2
                                                                   DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012



6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosures 3 and 4.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This issuance is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (g)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective May 17, 2012.




                                                Frank Kendall
                                                Acting Under Secretary of Defense for
                                                Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   4. HERB
Glossary




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           3
                                                                             DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012


                                              ENCLOSURE 1

                                               REFERENCES


(a)    DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
       Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(b)    DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
       Management Program,” July 10, 2009
(c)    DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003
(d)    DoD Directive 3000.03E, “DoD Executive Agent for Non-Lethal Weapons (NLW), and
       NLW Policy,” April 25, 2013
(e)    DoD Instruction 3216.01, “Use of Animals in DoD Programs,” September 13, 2010
(f)    DoD Instruction 3216.02, “Protection of Human Subjects and Adherence to Ethical
       Standards in DoD-Supported Research,” November 8, 2011
(g)    Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
       Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
       of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(h)    Joint Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate, “Joint Capabilities Document (JCD) for Joint Non-
       Lethal Effects (JNLE), Version 1,” January 22, 2008 1




1   Available from Joint Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate, Quantico, VA 22134, (703) 784-1977


Change 2, 08/31/2018                                   4                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUSITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L), as the OSD Principal Staff Assistant for the
DoD NLW Program, shall:

   a. Oversee NLW human effects characterization in coordination with the DoD Executive
Agent (EA) for NLW, consistent with Reference (d).

    b. When appropriate, approve alternate exposure policies needed for NLW development
where exposure requirements exceed existing policy limits (e.g., non-routine exposure of DoD
personnel to NLWs above existing occupational safety and health standards for the purposes of
demonstrations or training).


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING
(ASD(R&E)). The ASD(R&E), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L),
shall provide scientific and technical oversight and coordination on NLW human effects research
and development with the DoD EA for NLW.


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall oversee
DoD policy for the employment of NLW in consultation with the USD(AT&L) and the DoD EA
for NLW, in accordance with Reference (d). Decisions on NLW employment policy will be
informed by NLW human effects characterization data, reports, and related products.


4. COMMANDANT OF THE U. S. MARINE CORPS. The Commandant of the U.S. Marine
Corps, as the DoD EA for NLW in accordance with Reference (d), shall:

   a. Establish procedures pertaining to the characterization of NLW human effects.

   b. Designate a DoD NLW Health Effects Officer.

       (1) The DoD NLW Health Effects Officer shall hold credentials within the biomedical
sciences. He or she will report to the director of the jointly manned activity conducting the day-
to-day activities of the Joint NLW Program.

       (2) The DoD NLW Health Effects Officer shall manage the day-to-day activities
associated with NLW human effects, including the establishment, maintenance, and coordination
of NLW human effects characterization processes and guidance on DoD NLW human effects
research and development and risk assessment. This individual will serve as the primary point of
contact on NLW human effects and as the chair of the HERB.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012



    c. Identify a core of NLW human effects subject matter experts (SMEs), to include the DoD
NLW Health Effects Officer, to assist DoD Component combat and materiel developers and
program managers in the NLW capabilities development process, in assessment of human
effects, and in conducting non-lethal-effects characterizations and risk assessments.

  d. In coordination with the HERB, prescribe processes and procedures for the conduct of
HERB reviews for all NLW programs.

    e. Convene and conduct the HERB according to the procedures in Enclosure 4 of this
Instruction.

    f. Establish and maintain a repository for information related to NLW human effects, human
effects characterizations, and risk assessments in order to provide a central resource for NLW
human effects data and information for use by the DoD NLW community.

    g. Coordinate NLW human effects matters with appropriate departments and agencies
external to DoD as approved by the USD(AT&L) or USD(P).


5. DIRECTOR, OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION (DOT&E). The Director,
DOT&E shall:

     a. Advise the Secretary of Defense, the USD(AT&L), the Secretaries of the Military
Departments, and the DoD EA for NLW with respect to operational test and evaluation of NLW
as it relates to NLW human effects characterization.

   b. Prescribe policies and procedures for the conduct of operational test and evaluation that
involve human effects characterization, including:

       (1) Counter-personnel systems.

         (2) Counter-materiel systems that involve the RSI to humans from collateral damage
(e.g., directed energy systems that may involve secondary non-lethal collateral damage effects to
humans).

    c. Provide guidance to and consult with the Secretary of Defense, the USD(AT&L) and the
Secretaries of the Military Departments with respect to operational test and evaluation of systems
that require human effects characterization.

   d. Approve the adequacy of operational test plans that involve human effects
characterization.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012


6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND COMMANDER, U.S.
SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND (USSOCOM). The Secretaries of the Military
Departments and the Commander, USSOCOM, shall:

   a. Ensure the policies and procedures in this Instruction are applied to all NLW programs.

    b. Ensure that a human effects characterization is completed in the development of NLW
during the acquisition process in order to assess the likelihood of achieving the desired effect and
to identify RSI associated with NLW in counter-personnel and counter-materiel applications.

    c. Ensure that NLW program managers incorporate assessment of human effects and the
risks posed by NLW into project plans and test requirements.

    d. Ensure human effects assessment data is provided to the servicing legal office to support
the legal review of non-lethal weapons required during the acquisition process. Legal reviews
ensure weapons being acquired by DoD remain consistent with applicable law, including U.S.
treaty obligations, customary international law, and the law of war. Early identification of legal
issues of concern reduces costs and facilitates the development of viable systems.

    e. Plan for and provide adequate resources to aid in NLW requirements generation, and in
assessment and characterization of human effects and risk.

    f. Appoint one member from their respective Surgeon General offices and one member from
their respective safety centers (or equivalents), as applicable, to serve on the HERB.

    g Ensure that NLW program managers adhere to the HERB procedures in Enclosure 4 of
this Instruction.

   h. Ensure that RSI of NLW is addressed in appropriate capabilities documents (e.g.,
capability development and production documents).

    i. Develop formal processes for the use of NLW on DoD personnel (e.g., assessments,
training, or demonstrations) when such use is not considered research involving a human subject
by a DoD Component pursuant to Reference (f).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. CAPABILITIES DEVELOPMENT

   a. Combat and materiel developers shall consult human effects and developmental and
operational test and evaluation SMEs early in the NLW capabilities development process.

        (1) Human effects SMEs shall advise combat developers in articulating NLW human
effects requirements to support the development of suitable human effects-related performance
attributes (e.g., duration of effect, reversibility, RSI).

        (2) Developmental and operational test and evaluation SMEs shall advise combat
developers on testing protocols and procedures to ensure NLW performance metrics are
quantitatively or qualitatively verifiable.

    b. Combat developers, in consultation with human effects and developmental and
operational test and evaluation SMEs, shall ensure NLW effectiveness and human effects-related
performance attributes are addressed in appropriate capability documents (e.g., capability
development and capability production documents).

       (1) The effectiveness of NLW is critical to successful employment and shall be
designated as a key system attribute (KSA) or key performance parameter (KPP) in capabilities
documents.

        (2) Combat developers, working with warfighter input, shall determine the human
effects-related performance attributes of NLW, to include acceptable RSI. These attributes may
be addressed in capabilities documents as attributes, KSAs, and KPPs. RSI shall be addressed as
a KSA or KPP.

    c. RSI shall provide the force commander a measure of the likelihood that employed NLW
may directly cause injury requiring HCC Index 1 or 2. HCCs are depicted in the Figure, which
illustrates the relationship between RSI and the HCC indexes. HCC 0 reflects limited first
responder requirements such as self-aid or buddy-aid. HCC 1 reflects first responder care that
could include resuscitation and stabilization. HCC 2 reflects forward hospitalization capabilities
such as advanced emergency or surgical services. Common DoD terminology for HCC indexes
is provided in the Joint Capabilities Document for Joint Non-Lethal Effects (Reference (h)).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            8                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012


                                      Figure. HCC Indexes




2. HUMAN-EFFECTS CHARACTERIZATON

    a. NLW program managers, in consultation with SMEs and the HERB, shall identify the
knowledge gaps in the human effects data that need to be addressed to satisfy warfighter
requirements. Assessment of human effects and the risks posed by NLW shall be conducted
before milestone (MS) B (engineering and manufacturing development phase) approval or, for a
system or program initiated at or beyond MS B, as soon as practicable.

    b. Human effects SMEs shall determine the HERL, as described in the Table, for candidate
NLW. The HERL is a measure of the availability, sufficiency, and maturity of human effects
knowledge regarding a specific NLW. NLW shall not be required to achieve a particular HERL;
rather the purpose of the HERL shall be to describe the scope of scientific research applicable to
specific NLW.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            9                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012


                                     Table. HERL Guide

LEVEL                                         DESCRIPTION
  9       Human or surrogate participation in operational testing. Data validated from live fire
          experimentation and fielding.
   8      Human or surrogate tests in field environment with mature prototype systems under
          realistic conditions.
   7      Human studies or surrogates in lab or field environments with prototype systems
          under specific, highly controlled, exposure conditions.
   6      Non-human primate or large-animal models confirm safety. Provide basis of limited
          human studies in laboratory to examine effectiveness.
   5      Studies in large-animal models to more fully characterize effects, demonstrate
          technology effectiveness and safety.
   4      Bioeffect mechanism accepted by the scientific community; small animal studies
          conducted to develop dose-response relationships.
   3      Bioeffect mechanism clearly identified; studies to determine dose-response
          relationships planned or begun in small animal models.
   2      In-vitro and cellular models used to study postulated bioeffect mechanisms; important
          dose-response parameters are postulated.
   1      Bioeffect mechanism postulated through paper studies, theoretical analysis.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                          10                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012


                                          ENCLOSURE 4

                                               HERB


1. PURPOSE

   a. The HERB is established to independently review human effects analyses that apply to
NLW. The implementation of the HERB review ensures that the human effects of NLWs are
evaluated consistently.

   b. The HERB advises program managers and milestone decision authorities (MDAs) of the
quality and completeness of human effects information, identifies potential human effects risks,
and provides recommendations for further research and considerations to mitigate these risks.


2. MEMBERSHIP

   a. The HERB is comprised of the DoD Health Effects Officer, members representing the
Surgeon Generals of each Service (including the Medical Officer of the U.S. Marine Corps) and
USSOCOM, as applicable, and a safety representative from each Service and USSOCOM.

   b. The DoD NLW Health Effects Officer serves as the chair of the HERB.


3. PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES

   a. A HERB review involving a specific NLW is scheduled based on recommendations of the
DoD NLW Health Effects Officer and by request of the MDA or NLW program manager to the
DoD Health Effects Officer. The HERB review shall be conducted prior to acquisition decision
points, to include the materiel development decision point.

    b. HERB members shall be provided relevant reference material from the NLW program
manager and human effects SMEs in advance of the review. Each HERB review meeting
includes presentations from the NLW program manager, human effects SMEs, and other invited
speakers on the NLW under review; however, none of the invited participants shall be allowed
to participate in the Board’s deliberations.

    c. The HERB shall produce a memorandum that provides an assessment and
recommendations on the NLW evaluated to the NLW program manager and MDA. The HERB
memorandum additionally can be used by the NLW program to support legal, treaty, and policy
reviews.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           11                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                      DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012


                                             GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


DoDD            DoD Directive
DoDI            DoD Instruction
DOT&E           Director, Operational Test and Evaluation


EA              Executive Agent


HCC             health care capability
HERB            Human Effects Review Board
HERL            Human Effects Readiness Level

KSA             key system attribute
KPP             key performance parameter


MDA             milestone decision authority
MS              milestone


NLW             non-lethal weapons


RSI             risk of significant injury


SME             subject matter expert


USD(AT&L) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(P)    Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USSOCOM   U.S. Special Operations Command


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

combat developer. Command or agency that formulates doctrine, concepts, organization,
material requirements and objectives. May be used generically to represent the user community
role in the material acquisition process.


Change 2, 08/31/2018                            12                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                      DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012



counter-materiel. Directed effects against materiel (vehicles, vessels, aircraft, buildings,
facilities, structures, weapon systems, ammunition, weapons of mass destruction, etc.). Non-
lethal counter-materiel effects must remain non-lethal to personnel.

counter-personnel. Effects directed against individual(s).

effect. The physical or behavioral state of a system that results from an action, set of actions, or
another effect; the result, outcome, or consequence of an action; a change to a condition,
behavior, or degree of freedom.

effectiveness. The extent to which specific NLW achieve the intended effect.

HCC Index 0. Limited first-responder capability including self-aid, buddy-aid, and combat
lifesaver skills.

HCC Index 1. First responder-capability including resuscitation, stabilization, and emergency
care.

HCC Index 2. Forward resuscitative and theater hospitalization capabilities including advanced
emergency, surgical, and ancillary services.

HERL. A measure of the availability, sufficiency, and maturity of human effects knowledge
regarding a specific NLW.

human effect. The physical impact on, or behavioral response of, a human resulting from a
stimulus or set of stimuli.

human effects characterization. A formal process for fully describing the compendium of
physiological- and behavioral-effects knowledge associated with a given NLW. It establishes
the baseline human effects understanding of NLW, identifies risks and data gaps in human
effects knowledge, and facilitates presentation and communication of its human effects.

incapacitate. To disable, inhibit, or degrade one or more functions or capabilities of a target to
render it ineffective.

joint NLW program. Joint efforts related to research, development, test, and evaluation under
DoD EA for NLW oversight.

materiel developer. A command or agency responsible for research and development,
production, and fielding of a new materiel system.

NLW. Defined in Reference (d).

non-lethal technology. Technology being considered or utilized as an NLW.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             13                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                       DoDI 3200.19, May 17, 2012


permanent injury. Physical damage to a person that permanently impairs physiological function
and restricts the employment or other activities of that person for the rest of his or her life.

reversibility. The ability to return the target to its pre-engagement functionality. It is usually
measured by the time and level of effort required for recovery of the target.

RSI. The potential of NLW to directly cause injury requiring HCC Index 1 or higher HCC index
treatment, permanent injury, or death. RSI is the parameter used to describe reversibility of
NLW as it relates to human effects.

target. An area, complex, installation, force, equipment, capability, function, or behavior
identified for possible action to support a commander’s objectives, guidance, and intent.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             14                                     GLOSSARY
