                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 4170.11
                                                                              December 11, 2009
                                                          Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018

                                                                                          USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:      Installation Energy Management

References: See Enclosure 1

1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5134.01 (Reference (a)),
reissues DoD Instruction 4170.11 (Reference (b)) to reflect changes in Public Laws 110-140 and
109-58 (References (c) and (d) respectively) and requirements of Executive Order (E.O.) 13693
(Reference (e)).

   b. Implements policy established in DoD Instruction 4140.25 (Reference (f)) and provides
guidance, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures for DoD installation energy
management.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”). The term “Military Services,” as used herein, refers to the Army, the
Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.

   b. Pertains to all phases of administration, planning, programming, budgeting, operations,
maintenance, training, and materiel acquisition activities that affect the supply, reliability, and
consumption of facility energy.


3. POLICY. In accordance with References (f), it is DoD policy that:

    a. Installation energy management shall satisfy all goals and policies established by
References (b) through (e), and in accordance with sections 8251 et seq. and 6361 et seq. of Title
42, United States Code (Reference (g)).
                                                                DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009



   b. DoD utility infrastructure be secure, safe, reliable, and efficient.

   c. Utility commodities are procured effectively and efficiently.

   d. The Department of Defense maximize energy and water conservation efforts.

    e. The Department of Defense invest in cost effective renewable energy sources and energy
efficient facility designs and regionally consolidate Defense requirements to aggregate
bargaining power to achieve better energy pricing.

    f. This Instruction, including the requirements in References (c), (d), and (e), shall be applied
to all facilities that use U.S. funding, both appropriated and non-appropriated, for construction,
sustainment, renovation, maintenance, or operation, without regard to the location of those
facilities.

    g. Readiness and sustainability policies and installation missions are considered and
facilitated as part of installation energy management practices.


4. RE(V)SPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS

    a. The Annual Energy Management Report, referred to in paragraph 2.a. of Enclosure 3 of
this instruction, has been assigned report control symbol DD-AT&L(A)1529 in accordance with
the procedures in Volume 1 of DoD Manual 8910.01 (Reference (h)). The expiration date of this
information collection is listed in the DoD Information Collections System at
https://apps.osd.mil/sites/DoDIIC/Pages/default.aspx.

    b. The Energy Conservation Investment Program, referred to in paragraphs 1.d.(3) and
3.d.(3) of Enclosure 2 and paragraphs 2.b, and 3(b)2. of Enclosure 3 of this instruction, has been
assigned report control symbol DD-AT&L(A)2603 in accordance with the procedures in
Reference (h). The expiration date of this information collection is listed in the DoD Information
Collections System at https://apps.osd.mil/sites/DoDIIC/Pages/default.aspx.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             2
                                                             DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this Instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (i)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective December 11, 2009.




                                                Ashton B. Carter
                                                Under Secretary of Defense for
                                                Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           3
                                                                    DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

                                            ENCLOSURE 1

                                            REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
      Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(b)   DoD Instruction 4170.11, “Installation Energy Management,” November 22, 2005 (hereby
      cancelled)
(c)   Public Law 110-140, “Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007,”
      December 19, 2007
(d)   Public Law 109-58, “Energy Policy Act of 2005,” August 8, 2005
(e)   Executive 13693, “Planning for Federal Sustainability in the Next Decade,” March 19,
      2015
(f)   DoD Instruction 4140.25, “DoD Management Policy for Energy Commodities and Related
      Services,” June 25, 2015
(g)   Sections 8251 et seq. and 6361 et seq. of title 42, United States Code
(h)   DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
      DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014
(i)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
      Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
      of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(j)   Executive Order 13221, “Energy Efficient Standby Power Devices,” July 31, 2001
(k)   Section 317 of Public Law 107-107, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
      2002,” December 28, 2001
(l)   National Institute of Building Sciences Whole Building Design Guide 1
(m)   Part 434 of title 10, Code of Federal Regulations
(n)   American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers Standard
      90.1-2013
(o)   Federal Leadership in High Performance and Sustainable Buildings Memorandum of
      Understanding,” January 24, 2006 2
(p)   Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC 3-400-01), “Energy Conservation,” July 5, 2002
(q)   U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design rating
      system (current version)
(r)   Assistant Secretary of Defense for Logistics Memorandum, “Energy Conservation
      Investment Program Guidance,” March 17, 1993
(s)   Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC 3-500), Electrical Series 3
(t)   DoD Directive 3020.40, “DoD Policy and Responsibilities for Critical Infrastructure,”
      January 14, 2010
(u)   Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC 3-540-01), Engine-Driven Generator Systems for Backup
      Power Applications 4
(v)   DoD Instruction 6055.17, “DoD Installation Emergency Management (IEM) Program,”

1
 The Whole Building Design Guide is a DoD-sponsored, Web-based application available at www.wbdg.org
2
 Available at http://www.epa.gov/oaintrnt/documents/sustainable_mou_508.pdf
3 Available at http://www.wbdg.org/ccb/browse_cat.php?c=4
4 Available at http://www.wbdg.org/ccb/browse_doc.php?d=9689


Change 2, 08/31/2018                                4                                   ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

     January 13, 20095
(w) Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Logistics Memorandum, “Department of
     Defense Energy Security Policy,” January 14, 1992
(x) National Institute of Standards and Technology Handbook 135, Life Cycle Costing
     Manual 6
(y) “Department of Defense Energy Manager’s Handbook,” August 25, 2005
(z) Presidential Memorandum, “Energy Conservation at Federal Facilities,” May 3, 20017
(aa) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Revised Guidance for the Utilities
     Privatization Program,” October 9, 2002 8
(ab) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Memorandum,
     “Supplemental Guidance for the Utilities Privatization Program,” November 2, 20059
(ac) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Memorandum,
     “Supplemental Guidance for the Utilities Privatization Program,” March 20, 2006 10
(ad) OMB Circular A-94, “Guidelines and Discount Rates for Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal
     Programs,” October 29, 1992




5 Available at http://dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/605517p.pdf
6 Available at http://www.wbdg.org/ccb/browse_doc.php?d=8097
7
  Available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/WCPD-2001-05-07/pdf/WCPD-2001-05-07-Pg698-2.pdf
8
  Available at http://www.acq.osd.mil/ie/irm/irm_library/Oct9_2002_DepSecDef.pdf
9
  Available at http://www.acq.osd.mil/ie/irm/irm_library/UPSuppGuidance2005-3793-ATL_signed.pdf
10
   Available at http://www.acq.osd.mil/ie/irm/irm_library/UPguidance_20March06.pdf


Change 2, 08/31/2018                                 5                                   ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
ENVIRONMENT (ASD(EI&E)). The ASD(EI&E), under the authority, direction, and control
of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)),
shall:

   a. Oversee the Department’s implementation of References (c), (d), and (e).

  b. Represent the Department of Defense on Federal Interagency Sustainability Steering
Committee and will continue to contribute to other standing working groups as a non-leader
member agency established by Reference (e).

   c. Implement policies and provide guidance to the DoD Components for managing facility
energy resources in the Department of Defense and serve as the primary adviser for facility
energy policy matters.

   d. Provide for energy conservation and resource management, including:

       (1) Goals. Establish departmental energy conservation program goals and develop
procedures to measure energy conservation accomplishments by the DoD Components.

       (2) Annual Guidance. Provide annual programming guidance and oversight for the
achievement of DoD energy goals and objectives.

       (3) Investment. Establish criteria, program and budget for, and monitor the execution of
the Energy Conservation Investment Program (ECIP).

        (4) Reporting. Develop policy guidance consistent with References (c), (d), and (e), to
report energy and water use and results of conservation accomplishments against Federal energy
conservation and management goals.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY (DLA). The Director, DLA, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), through the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Logistics and Materiel Readiness, shall:

   a. Perform energy management responsibilities assigned to DLA and the Defense Energy
Support Center (DESC) according to Enclosure 3 of this Instruction.

    b. Maintain a DoD energy database to provide petroleum and alternative fuel data required
for fulfilling the reporting requirements of References (c), (d), and (e). Fuel supplied by the
General Services Administration (GSA) will not be entered into this database.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009



  c. Monitor energy markets to determine existing or potential adverse conditions and advise
DoD Components utilizing DLA energy programs.


3. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

   a. Execute defense installation energy policies in paragraph 3.e. according to the procedures
described in Enclosure 3.

    b. Designate and assign qualified Government personnel to represent the DoD Component in
national, international, Government, or industry organizations engaging installation energy
policy matters. Any contacts with international organizations or foreign governments will be
coordinated in advance with the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy.

    c. Designate and assign qualified personnel as energy managers for covered facilities in
accordance with the requirements of Reference (c). Designated energy managers shall be
responsible for implementing the requirements of all applicable statutes, E.O.s, and DoD
issuances at their covered facilities.

   d. Establish and execute an energy program management structure to:

         (1) Provide program and budget funds sufficient to meet energy and water conservation
goals.

       (2) Implement DoD-established policies and procedures to measure progress in meeting
energy and water conservation goals.

        (3) Report energy and water use and progress in meeting conservation goals and program
costs and ECIP program execution. The report data are also used for calculating greenhouse gas
emissions.

       (4) Develop programs that result in facilities that are designed, constructed, operated,
maintained, and renovated to achieve optimum performance and maximize energy efficiency
according to sustainable design principles.

       (5) Provide facilities with trained energy program managers, operators, and maintenance
personnel for lighting, heating, power generating, water, ventilating, and air conditioning plants
and systems. Conduct training programs, as required, to ensure energy efficient operation and
maintenance (O&M) of sustainable facilities.

       (6) Require facility leases for Government-owned, contractor-operated facilities to
include the implementation of sound energy conservation procedures; allow contract
modification to accommodate energy efficiency improvements; and measure and report energy
use and the resulting savings.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                           DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

   e. Develop internal energy awareness programs to:

       (1) Publicize energy conservation goals.

       (2) Disseminate information on energy matters and energy conservation techniques.

       (3) Emphasize energy conservation at all command levels and relate energy conservation
to operational readiness.

       (4) Promote energy efficiency awards and recognition.

       (5) Continue to promote energy awareness at the workplace.

       (6) Encourage command or installation to observe October as energy awareness month.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                          8                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                                        PROCEDURES


1. GENERAL GUIDANCE. Reducing energy consumption and investing in energy reduction
measures makes good business sense and allows limited resources to be applied to readiness and
modernization. The Department will make great strides in energy efficiency and consumption
reduction to meet the DoD vision of providing reliable and cost effective utility services to the
warfighter. Dramatic fluctuations in the cost of energy significantly impact already constrained
operating budgets, providing even greater incentives to conserve and seek ways to lower energy
consumption.

   a. Governing Statutes and E.O.s. References (c), (d), and (e) require a reduction in
emissions and improvement in energy management, and task the Department of Defense to
provide leadership to promote energy efficiency, water conservation, the use of renewable
energy, and to help foster markets for emerging technologies. The E.O. goals specifically
address greenhouse gas emissions, energy efficiency, renewable energy, petroleum use, source
energy consumption, and water usage. E.O. 13221 (Reference (j)) directs Federal agencies to
purchase products that use no more than 1 watt in their standby mode.

    b. Policy Development and Implementation. DoD policy initiatives shall be coordinated
through an ASD(EI&E)-led interservice working group forum.

    c. Management and Administration. Energy management on DoD installations focuses on
improving efficiency, eliminating waste, and enhancing the quality of life while meeting mission
requirements. Accomplishing these objectives will reduce costs and ensure that the program
goals are achieved. The DoD energy program for facilities is decentralized, with the DoD
Component headquarters providing guidance and funding and regional commands or military
installations managing site-specific energy and water conservation programs. Funding of energy
projects is multi-faceted, using a combination of Federal appropriations and private funds.
Installations are responsible for maintaining awareness, developing and implementing energy
projects, ensuring that new construction uses sustainable design principles, and meeting energy
goals. The energy management infrastructure is composed of:

        (1) E.O. 13693 Senior Sustainability Council (SSC). The ASD(EI&E) established a
DoD SSC for the implementation of Reference (e). The membership of the committee contains
the cross-section of DoD senior leadership necessary to make decisions needed to remove
obstacles hindering compliance with the energy program. The SSC is supported by a working
group, which provides programmatic logistical and technical support. The working group
includes representatives from multiple areas of OSD, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the
Defense Agencies. Members of the working group also provide representation on a variety of
other cross-functional integrated product teams and working groups. This integration of
membership helps ensure a consistent approach to energy conservation throughout the
Department of Defense. DoD Components are also encouraged to develop cross-functional
groups at the DoD Component level.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            9                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009



        (2) Interagency Working Groups. Representatives from the DoD Components shall be
assigned to participate in interagency working groups in support of the Interagency Energy
Management Task Force, as required. Established interagency working groups include, but are
not limited to, renewable energy, sustainable design, ESPC, and energy efficient products.

         (3) Component Energy Managers. As required by Reference (c), each DoD Component
shall designate an energy manager for each covered facility who shall be responsible for
implementing the requirements of all governing statutes and DoD implementing guidance and
for reporting to the DoD energy manager, through the respective chain of command, on aspects
of facility energy management within the DoD Component.

   d. Goals

        (1) General. The Department of Defense shall strive to modernize infrastructure,
increase utility and energy conservation, enhance demand reduction, and improve energy
resilience, thereby saving taxpayer dollars and reducing emissions that contribute to air pollution
and global climate change.

        (2) Program Goals. Specific program goals that correspond with the most current
legislation and E.O.s (References (c), (d), and (e)) shall be published through ASD(EI&E)
memorandums, if and when required.


2. REPORTING. The following reporting mechanisms shall be used to track energy
conservation measures, investments, and performance against established goals.

     a. Annual Energy Management Report (AEMR) and Long-Term Plan and Strategy for
Conservation. The DoE, under the Federal Energy Management Program, working with the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB), consolidates the separate energy management data
and reports required by Reference (g) as amended by References (c), (d), and (e). Section 317 of
Public Law 107-107 (Reference (k)) requires the Department of Defense to submit reports
required by References (c) and (d) to the Congressional defense committees as well. The AEMR
is the primary vehicle by which the Department tracks and measures its performance and energy
efficiency improvement. The format for the report is prescribed annually by DoE and contains a
narrative section, tables, a data report spreadsheet (quantitative data on consumption and costs),
and a scorecard. The DoD Components will maintain a utility energy reporting system to
prepare the data for submission of this report. Along with the AEMR, DoD Components shall
also submit a long-term plan and strategy for achieving the requirements of References (c), (d),
and (e). Changes and updates to the initial long-term plan and strategy shall be submitted
annually in conjunction with the AEMR. The ASD(EI&E) compiles and submits the report and
revisions to Department’s Strategy for Conservation based on DoD Component inputs.

    b. ECIP. ECIP is an OSD centrally managed, project-oriented element within the Defense-
wide military construction (MILCON) account that is programmed annually and represents the
primary direct DoD investment in energy and water conservation. The program requires



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            10                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

Congressional notification prior to project execution and periodic updates of execution status.
DoD Components with active projects shall submit quarterly project status updates to the
ASD(EI&E) within 30 days of the end of each fiscal quarter.


3. IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES. DoD Components shall manage their own energy
programs to meet the requirements of this instruction. The primary objectives are to improve
energy efficiency and eliminate energy waste while maintaining reliable utility service.

    a. Awareness Campaign. Energy awareness programs publicize energy conservation goals,
disseminate information on energy matters and energy conservation techniques, and emphasize
energy conservation at all command levels and relate energy conservation to operational
readiness.

        (1) Training and Education. Awareness and training programs are important to the
Department of Defense for achieving and sustaining energy efficient operations at the installation
level. DoD personnel shall be trained through either commercially available or in-house
generated technical courses, seminars, conferences, software, videos, and certifications. The
DoD Components shall increase awareness and publicize program goals, tools, and progress at
different organizational levels through Web sites, conferences, e-mails, displays, reports,
newsletters, handbooks, and other methods.

        (2) Recognition. Energy conservation awards shall be presented to individuals,
organizations, and installations in recognition of their energy savings and water conservation
efforts. In addition to recognition, these awards provide motivation for continued energy
reduction achievements. The DoD Components shall establish and maintain their individual
awards programs and incorporate on-the-spot awards and incentive awards to recognize
exceptional performance and participation in the energy management program. DoD
Components are encouraged to participate in the DoE’s Federal Energy and Water Management
Awards Program. This program recognizes organizations, small groups, and individuals for
outstanding achievements in several energy-related categories within the Federal sector. Each
DoD Component may also recognize one outstanding individual for overall contribution to the
program. In addition to DoE and DoD Component energy award programs, the White House
recognizes leadership in Federal energy management with Presidential awards.

        (3) Showcase Facilities. Showcase facilities demonstrate promising best commercial
practices and the use of innovative techniques to improve energy and water efficiency. The
Department of Defense shall emphasize the benefit of these facilities, with a target of each
Service developing at least one showcase facility for the federally sponsored program per year.
The program is described at
http://www1.eere.energy.gov/femp/services/awards_fedshowcase.html

   b. Energy and Water Efficiency Investments

       (1) Capital Investment. DoD Components shall require that all large capital energy
investments in existing buildings employ the most energy efficient designs, systems, equipment,



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            11                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

and controls that are life cycle cost effective, in accordance with the requirements and provisions
in paragraph 2.b.(1)(a)2 of this enclosure, and the requirements of Reference (c).

           (a) Project Development

                1. Life Cycle Cost Analysis. DoD Components shall continue to utilize life cycle
cost analysis in making decisions about their investment in products, services, construction, and
other projects to lower the Federal Government’s costs and to reduce energy and water
consumption. All projects with 10 years or less simple payback that fit within financial
constraints shall be implemented. The DoD Components shall consider the life cycle costs of
combining projects and encourage aggregating energy efficiency projects with renewable energy
projects where appropriate. The use of passive solar design shall be required when cost effective
over the life of the project. Sustainable development projects shall continue to use life cycle
costing methodology and should follow all aspects of the Whole Building Design Guide
(Reference (l)).

                 2. Facility Energy and Water Audits. Audits evaluate current energy usage and
assist installations in determining the best locations to incorporate energy and water savings
measures. Reference (c) requires Federal agencies to audit approximately 25 percent of their
covered facilities each year. Since auditing 25 percent of DoD facilities each year may be cost
prohibitive, the DoD Components are encouraged to use alternative financing through utility
energy services contracts (UESCs) and energy savings performance contracts (ESPCs) to
conduct their energy audits. In addition to facility audits, software such as renewables and
energy efficiency planning and the Federal energy decision screening systems may be utilized to
assist this process by determining the investment required to meet energy reduction goals. DoD
Component energy managers are responsible for identifying facilities that are covered by the
requirements of Reference (c) for purposes of planning and conducting audits, in accordance
with applicable guidance. Each covered facility shall be audited at least once every 4 years.
Results of audits must be entered and tracked via a DoE sponsored database in accordance with
Reference (c).

               3. Sustainable Building Design. Sustainability initiatives require an integrated
design approach to the life cycle of buildings and infrastructures. The concepts of sustainable
development as applied to DoD installations shall continue to be incorporated into the master
planning process of each of the Services. MILCON and facility repair or sustainment projects
shall include an energy analysis to show compliance with part 434 of title 10, Code of Federal
Regulations (Reference (m)); relevant E.O.s; and other Federal energy conservation
requirements, including the requirements in Reference (c). All new facility construction and
major renovations shall perform 30 percent better than American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers Standard 90.1-2013 (Reference (n)). All new
construction and major renovations shall incorporate all five guiding principles from the 2006
Federal Leadership in High Performance and Sustainable Buildings Memorandum of
Understanding (Reference (o)). Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC) 3-400-01 (Reference (p))
provides for definitions, design criteria, and life cycle cost analysis for sustainable development
principles. Renewable energy systems shall be considered when cost effective through a life
cycle cost analysis. The DoD Components shall obtain at least U.S. Green Building Council’s



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             12                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) rating system (Reference (q)) silver
level of performance or equivalent (based on the most current rating system aligning to DoD
UFCs). The DoD Components shall document sustainable development costs on DD Form
1391, “Military Construction Project Data
(http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/forms/eforms/dd1391.pdf) and are encouraged to approach
land use planning and urban design in a holistic manner and integrate it with energy planning.
Additional information on sustainable design is in Reference (l). This intuitive, Internet-based
tool serves as a portal to the design principles and other resources needed to construct cost
effective, sustainable buildings.

           (b) Project Execution. The DoD Components are encouraged to include
cogeneration systems, fuel switching, high efficiency lighting, waste heat usage, and thermal
storage units in new construction or retrofit projects when cost effective. The DoD Components
are encouraged to incorporate energy saving technologies such as efficient thermal storage
systems, chillers, boilers, lights, motors, energy management control systems (EMCSs), ground
source heat pumps, and water reducing devices.

               1. O&M. The DoD Components shall ensure that the energy efficiency measures
are incorporated into repair and minor construction projects using available O&M funding. The
DoD Components shall also ensure that sufficient O&M funding is available to support other
projects using alternative financing vehicles such as UESC and ESPC.

                 2. ECIP. Congress appropriates funding for the ECIP to execute projects that
save energy or reduce energy costs. Funds shall be allocated on a fair share basis based on the
DoD Component’s previous year reported facility energy use and factoring in their obligation
rate for the last 5 years. This approach allows the DoD Components to manage the program with
a degree of funding certainty and encourages timely execution. The DoD Components shall
strive to obligate 100 percent of the ECIP funds provided by the end of the third quarter in the
fiscal year in which the funds were issued. At the end of the third quarter, any unobligated
funding at that point may, at the discretion of the ASD(EI&E), be withdrawn and redistributed to
another DoD Component poised to obligate against a valid design-complete project, with priority
given to renewable energy projects. ECIP funding should only be applied to projects that
directly produce energy savings or cost reduction. However, the ASD(EI&E) shall have the
discretion to directly apply funding for other uses such as studies and assessments if deemed
appropriate. Realized savings should not only be auditable, but the initial submission of
proposed projects shall identify the method to be used for savings verification on the DD Form
1391. Project lists shall include project title, installation, savings to investment ratio (SIR), and
pa0y1back, as well as the estimated project cost and annual energy savings in British thermal
units and dollars. At the discretion of the DoD Component, up to 25 percent of its annual ECIP
target budget may be programmed against renewable energy applications that do not necessarily
meet the SIR and payback period criteria in order to expand use of renewable energy
applications and to meet the goals of References (c), (d), and (e). Each DoD Component should
strive to attain an overall annual ECIP program SIR of 2:l and must meet the minimum SIR of
1.25:1. Detailed ECIP program guidance can be found in the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Logistics Memorandum (Reference (r)).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             13                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

                3. Alternate Financing Mechanisms. Partnerships with the private sector through
alternative financing (UESC and ESPC) are a crucial tool for financing energy efficiency
measures and allow installations to improve their infrastructure. These contracts shall include
infrastructure upgrades (e.g., new cogeneration, renewable systems, and ancillary structures) and
new equipment (e.g., heating, ventilation, and air conditioning; lighting; motors; fixtures; and
controls) to help the installations reduce energy and water consumption. Increasingly, projects
with higher SIR should be first pursued using UESC and ESPC before consideration for ECIP,
since these projects are typically more attractive to the commercial sector. Any funds paid by
the DoD Component in the agreement pursuant to such a financed energy project shall be from
funds made available through the same project’s recurring or nonrecurring energy or water-
related cost savings. Payments may be made only when the project is determined to be life cycle
cost effective and when actual savings generated from the financed project exceed the payment
amount in the same year. Non-recurring savings, or ancillary savings, are those such as utility
rebates and avoided costs from repairs, replacements, retrofits, or capital improvements that have
been budgeted for but are no longer required because of the financed energy project. Recurring
savings are reductions in energy, water, or wastewater consumption; maintenance; or operations
costs because of the financed energy project. The basis for all cost savings used to pay for these
projects must be fully documented in the contract file.

                4. Information Management. DoD Components shall track all estimated and
actual costs, estimated and verified savings, interest rates, measurement and verification
information, and mark-ups as well as any changes to project scope that may affect costs and
savings. The DoD Components shall track and store this information.

                5. Expertise. Consistent with applicable law, activities not possessing the
prerequisite expertise may use the contracting centers of the Air Force, Navy, Army, and DESC
to ensure best value according to inter-Service support agreements or memorandums of
understanding. Contracting agencies should ensure that multi-year indefinite delivery and/or
indefinite quantity contracts are re-competed at regular intervals. Each DoD Component
contracting center that awards or administers ESPC or task orders shall conduct internal audits at
intervals not greater than every 5 years to ensure project performance and guaranteed savings.
DoD Components may issue more detailed implementing guidance.

        (2) EnergyStar® and Other Energy Efficient Products. The DoD Components shall select
energy efficient standby power devices, EnergyStar®, Federal Energy Management Program-
designated energy efficient products, and other energy efficient products when acquiring energy-
consuming products when it is life cycle cost effective to do so. Guidance generated by the DoE,
the GSA, and the DLA are continuously being incorporated into the sustainable design and
development of new and renovated facilities. Information technology hardware, computers, and
copying equipment shall be acquired under the EnergyStar® Program using GSA schedules,
Government-wide contracts, or Service contracts. Computer equipment should be turned off at
night or when not in use. The DLA distribution centers shall serve as the focal point for the DoD
program to procure energy and water efficient products. DLA and GSA product catalogs shall
be widely used, as well as the Construction Criteria Base (available on CD-ROM and the
Internet). Procuring agents, including users of Government credit cards, shall procure
EnergyStar® products and other products in the top 25 percent of energy efficiency.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            14                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009



        (3) EnergyStar® Buildings. The DoD Components shall encourage participation in the
EnergyStar® building program, developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, which
promotes energy efficiency in buildings and requires measured building data and a comparison
with archetypes in various regions of the country. EnergyStar® building criteria are based on a
five-stage implementation strategy consisting of lighting upgrades, building tune-up, load
reductions, fan system upgrades, and heating and cooling system upgrades.

        (4) Solar Water Heating. In accordance with Reference (c) and where life cycle cost
effective, a minimum of 30 percent of facility hot water demand in new construction or buildings
undergoing major renovation shall be met with solar water heaters.

    c. Energy Resilience. The DoD Components shall take necessary steps to ensure energy
resilience on military installations. DoD Components shall plan and have the capability to
ensure available, reliable, and quality power to continuously accomplish DoD missions from
military installations and facilities. UFC 3-500 (Reference (s)) provides guidance to assist in the
determination of power availability, reliability, and quality definitions that will impact design
criteria for energy resilience. DoD Components shall protect any information or data on energy
resilience in accordance with pertinent DoD issuances on operations security.

       (1) Energy Resilience Requirements. DoD Components shall clearly define, identify,
and update critical energy requirements that align to critical mission operations in collaboration
with tenants, mission owners, and operators of critical facilities on military installations. DoD
Components shall incorporate defense critical infrastructure (DCI) when developing critical
energy requirements on military installations or facilities (Reference (t)).

         (2) Critical Energy Requirements. DoD Components shall determine their critical
energy requirements and conduct an engineering facility energy load analysis for these
requirements when metering data is not available. These critical energy requirements shall be
reviewed and updated on an annual basis. UFC 3-540-01 (Reference (u)) provides definitions
and design criteria to assist in the determination of critical energy requirements and to conduct
facility energy load analysis. The critical energy requirements and facility energy loads
identified by DoD Components shall be used to comply with:

            (a) Emergency Energy Preparedness. Critical energy requirements and facility
energy loads shall be included into emergency preparedness and continuity of operations plans,
communicated to utility providers for integration into service restoration plans, and
communicated within the installations, as well as with other relevant federal, State, and local
authorities. DoD Components shall ensure that:

                 1. Emergency preparedness and continuity of operations plans include an
installation’s plans to prioritize and restore power with local utilities; consider both host and
tenant critical energy requirements; describe movements to alternate locations in the case of a
power disruption; and ensure that existing utility contracts include emergency support
contingency clauses in the case of an energy disruption.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             15                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

                 2. Mutual aid agreements have been negotiated with State and local officials, as
well as utility providers to assist in an installation’s recovery and to minimize power disruption
impacts to the outlying community. DoD Instruction 6055.17 (Reference (v)) provides policy to
assist DoD installations to prepare, respond, and recover from emergencies.

           (b) Energy Generation Systems, Infrastructure, Equipment, Fuel, and Testing. DoD
Components shall identify, design, and install primary power and emergency energy generation
systems, infrastructure, and equipment to support their critical energy requirements.

                1. Energy resilience solutions are not limited to traditional standby or emergency
generators. They can include integrated, distributed, or renewable energy sources; diversified or
alternative fuel supplies; and movements to alternative locations, as well as upgrading, replacing,
and maintaining current energy generation systems, infrastructure, and equipment on military
installations and at facilities. Alternative locations that require a continuous supply of energy in
the event of an energy disruption or emergency shall also be subject to energy resilience
requirements.

               2. When selecting distributed or renewable energy systems and emergency
generators for energy resilience, they shall be properly designed to have the ability to prepare for
and recover from energy disruptions that impact mission assurance. Their design shall include
automatic transfer switching, inverters, and black-start capabilities to minimize energy resilience
risks. DoD Components shall also determine fueling or storage requirements for the selected
energy generation systems. DoD Components shall follow relevant UFCs for safe and cost
effective designs of energy generation systems that minimize risks to mission assurance when
complying with energy resilience requirements stated in this instruction.

                3. DoD Components shall ensure that primary power and emergency energy
generation systems, infrastructure, equipment, and fuel that support their critical energy
requirements receive the necessary maintenance. At a minimum, DoD Components shall
maintain primary power and emergency generation systems according to their technical
specifications and ensure that there is a trained operator assigned to maintain the energy
generation system, infrastructure, equipment and fuel. DoD Components shall also develop and
update fueling plans and ensure that fueling contracts are in place. The DLA should be
considered by DoD Components to service their fueling requirements, as appropriate. Further
guidance on energy generation systems, infrastructure, equipment, and fuel can be found in the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Logistics Memorandum (Reference (w)).

                4. DoD Components shall conduct full-scale and routine testing of emergency
and standby energy generation systems, infrastructure, equipment, and fuel that support their
critical energy requirements. A full-scale test includes operating all associated emergency and
standby energy generation systems, infrastructure, equipment, and fuel at full operational loads
while completely separated from the primary source of power. DoD Components may also elect
to substitute a black-start test for a full-scale test. Routine tests include operating all associated
emergency energy generation systems, infrastructure, equipment, and fuel at full operational
loads while still coupled with the primary source of power. At minimum, a full-scale test shall
be conducted on an annual basis and routine tests shall be conducted semi-annually. Routine



Change 2, 08/31/2018                              16                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

testing shall be conducted on a monthly basis for emergency and standby generation at DCI
facilities.

        (3) Execution and Implementation of Energy Resilience. DoD Components shall
perform periodic vulnerability assessments and audits to assess the risk of energy disruptions on
military installations, and implement remedial actions to remove unacceptable energy resilience
risks. DoD Components shall also provide energy projects that align to energy resilience
requirements during the planning, programming, budgeting, and execution process. These
energy projects shall be pursued based on life cycle cost effectiveness or if they remove
unacceptable energy resilience risks.

            (a) DoD Components are encouraged to use alternative financing or utility
privatization arrangements in the pursuit of energy resilience projects, when they are life cycle
cost effective. In collaboration with DoD Components, the ASD(EI&E) shall issue supporting
technical and budgetary guidance to assist DoD Components in prioritizing energy resilience
decisions, and shall update and provide this guidance annually.

             (b) In the pursuit of energy resilience projects, DoD Components shall use National
Institute of Standards and Technology Handbook 135, Life Cycle Costing Manual (Reference
(x)) to determine life cycle cost effectiveness. DoD Components shall pursue opportunities that
reduce life cycle costs, to the maximum extent practical, such as participation in peak shaving,
demand response programs, ancillary services markets, and other financial incentive programs.

        (4) Renewable Energy. The Department of Defense is committed to creating
opportunities to install renewable energy technologies and purchase electricity generated from
renewable sources when it is life cycle cost effective to enhance energy resilience. Passive solar
designs, such as building orientation and window placement and sizing, shall be implemented in
a variety of building types and new facility construction.

           (a) Purchases. The DoD Components shall purchase renewable energy generated
from solar, wind, geothermal, and biomass sources when cost effective and any premium is
considered fair and reasonable. The DoD Components are encouraged to aggregate regionally
when considering renewable energy purchases to leverage DoD buying power and produce
economy of scale savings. The DESC can act as a procurement agent for all renewable energy
purchases.

             (b) Generation. Exploration in efficiency opportunities in renewable energy
technologies such as wind, biomass, geothermal, ground source heat pumps, and photovoltaics
shall be pursued when life cycle cost effective. Self-generated power may be coupled with
ground source heat pumps, solar water heating systems, and photovoltaic arrays to generate
electricity at isolated locations, such as range targets, airfield landing strips, and remote water
pumping stations.

        (5) Distributed Energy Generation. Distributed energy resources shall be used for on-
site generation using micro-turbines, fuel cells, combined heat and power, and renewable
technologies when determined to be life cycle cost effective or to provide resilience and security



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             17                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

to mitigate unacceptable risk. In most cases, larger scale, off-grid, electrical generation systems
should be non-DoD owned and operated. Off-grid generation systems owned and operated by
the DoD Components may make sense for mission criticality and remote sites when it is life
cycle cost effective. In these cases, innovative energy generation technologies such as solar
lighting, large photovoltaic arrays, wind turbine generators, micro-turbines, and fuel cell
demonstration projects shall be utilized.

        (6) Procurement Strategy. Reference (d) requires agencies to take advantage of
competitive opportunities in the electricity and natural gas markets to reduce costs and enhance
services. The DoD Components should partner with DESC, the single manager for acquisition
of direct supply natural gas (DSNG) for delivery to DoD installations, to identify and develop
risk mitigation strategies appropriate for the risk preference profile of the end user. The DoD
Components are encouraged to aggregate demand across facilities or agencies to maximize the
economic advantage.

             (a) Electricity. The DoD Components should partner with DESC and aggregate
regional electricity requirements (including renewable energy) to competitively procure
electricity and ancillary and incidental services needed to meet the identified requirements.
Award determinations shall be based on best value and, where applicable, compared to the
applicable utility tariff available under a utility services contract to ensure economic value.

            (b) Direct Supply Natural Gas Program (DSNGP). DoD Components shall
competitively acquire DSNG under the DSNGP, managed by DESC, when cost effective and
when the DSNG has the same degree of supply reliability as other practical alternative energy
sources. All DoD installations that have the ability to compete natural gas requirements shall
participate in the DSNGP. The DESC and the applicable DoD Component may mutually agree
to exclude an installation from a DSNG contract under any one of these conditions:

               1. An award is uneconomical.

                2. The local distribution company (LDC) does not provide transportation from
the city gate to the end use customer.

              3. Ongoing or pending legal or regulatory action adversely impacts participation
in the program.

               4. The installation is impacted by base realignment and closure actions.

               5. Existing contractual arrangements with the LDC or with existing multi-year
DSNG suppliers offer better prices or have termination liabilities exceeding DESC direct supply
contract cost benefits.

               6. Loss of utility-sponsored demand side management program benefits is greater
than the potential savings available through the DESC DSNGP. The DoD Components shall
enter into and maintain all necessary LDC transportation agreements to support delivery to the
burner tip and for ensuring that sufficient funding is available for payment. The DoD



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             18                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

Components shall consult with DESC to ensure that the DSNG and LDC contracts are
synchronized.

   d. Efficiency Measures

        (1) EMCSs. The DoD Components are encouraged to apply EMCSs or other energy
management technology on all new and existing system expansion applications subject to
funding availability and cost effectiveness. The DoD Components shall ensure that installed
systems are provided with the necessary O&M support to maintain efficiency and resultant
savings. EMCS implementation using shared energy savings contracts, which provide
continuous O&M through the contract term, is an option to assure adequate O&M support. DoD
Component energy managers shall ensure compliance with the building benchmarking and
reporting requirements for building energy usage required by Reference (c), by using the EPA’s
EnergyStar® benchmarking or similar tool.

         (2) Metering. Application of meters and sub-meters are required for all appropriate
facilities by References (c) and (d). Appropriate facilities are those for which the DoD
Component has determined metering would be cost effective and practical as a management
enhancement tool to identify energy cost savings attributed to conservation projects, energy
systems maintenance activities, energy load management, command leadership, or other specific,
discrete measures implemented during the year. Usage shall be determined through engineering
estimates only when metering proves to be cost prohibitive and shall be reported as required in
paragraph 2.a. of this enclosure.

             (a) By 2012 and thereafter, electricity, natural gas, and water shall be metered on
appropriate facilities; steam will be metered at steam plants. Annually, installations should strive
to install meters in at least 15 percent of facilities that are not in compliance with this guidance.
Meters shall be installed in all MILCON, major renovation, and ESPC projects. DoD
Components must document findings that support a determination that a given facility is not an
appropriate facility to meter and, accordingly, is exempt from this guidance. Each DoD
Component should establish policy and specific criteria for installations to establish a metering
program. Each policy should address the process to be used for the Component’s approval of
exemptions. Final approval should reside at the DoD Component headquarters level. The
Department of Defense Energy Manager’s Handbook (Reference (y)) is available to assist in the
determination of cost effectiveness and practicality. For existing facilities, cost effectiveness can
generally be achieved where the cost of the meter, installation, and ongoing maintenance, data
collection, and data management does not exceed 20 percent of the yearly cost of the utility
being metered. Digital meters with interval and remote reading capabilities are required when
utility costs exceed the guidelines in Reference (y).

           (b) Meters with interval and remote reading capabilities are required on all new
construction and utilities system renovation projects exceeding 200,000 dollars. The remote
reading capability of meters can be considered as a part of a more progressive approach known
as advanced metering infrastructure (AMI), where two-way communication is established with
meters. By transmitting data to the meters, their functionality will be controlled through the
configuration programs. In addition, communication should be established with selected



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             19                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

building controls in order to effect energy consumption and take action such as load shedding,
when necessary. Also in AMI process, the metering data and service information is retrieved
from the meters to a meter data management (MDM) system where the information can be
processed for various purposes such as billing, demand response, alarming service issues,
estimation, validation, uniform energy management, and outage response.

             (c) On a case-by-case basis, DoD Components may install simpler, locally read
meters if it is determined that advanced meters are not practical. Safety switches will be required
on all new electrical metering systems to facilitate meter replacement and maintenance. Besides
utilizing the metering data in MDM systems through the implementation of AMI program,
metering data will be incorporated into existing energy tracking systems and made available to
facility and installation energy managers. While meters themselves do not constitute a direct
energy conservation measure, it is expected that the management of data collected through
metering will lead to energy and cost savings. Meter data should be collected, assimilated,
interpreted, and made available to facility and energy program managers. This information
should serve as the foundation to establishing facility energy efficiency relative to other facilities
in the building inventory. It should also serve to identify and confirm opportunities for energy
reduction or increased energy efficiency through improved operational procedures, best
practices, or energy conservation and retrofit projects.

        (3) Water Conservation. Reference (e) requires a reduction in water consumption
intensity and water efficiency improvement for Federal agencies, suggesting specific strategies
that include development of a water management plan and adoption of Federal Energy
Management Program water efficiency improvement best management practices (BMPs). The
BMPs range from system-related (boiler, steam, cooling tower, faucets, showerheads, etc.) to
public information and education programs. Installations shall incorporate water management
plans in their existing O&M plans and shall focus on dissemination of information to all levels to
educate personnel on water conservation practices. Audits shall be conducted to identify the best
opportunities and, where economical, installations shall initiate water conservation projects using
O&M, ECIP, UESC, or ESPC. The DoD Components shall continue to concentrate on water
conservation methods such as public awareness programs, early leak detection and repair, and
installation of low-flow water efficient fixtures in housing and administration buildings,
consisting of electronic flush sensors, electronic sensor control valves for hand wash lavatories,
and waterless urinals.

        (4) Electrical Load Reduction Measures. As a result of the Presidential Memorandum
(Reference (z)), DoD installations’ emergency load reduction plans were updated. The DoD
Components shall continue to identify load shedding techniques to cut electricity consumption in
buildings and facilities during power emergencies. Examples of these techniques include:
EMCSs, sub-metering, cogeneration, thermal storage systems, duty cycling of air conditioning in
military family housing by EMCSs, alternative energy sources for air conditioning, and turning
off unneeded lights with motion sensors and separate lighting circuits. In addition, the
Department of Defense continues to focus its energy conservation program on measures that
reduce electric consumption.

   e. Utilities Privatization. Historically, military installations have been unable to maintain



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             20                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

reliable utility systems due to inadequate funding and competing installation management
priorities. Utilities privatization is the preferred method for modernizing and recapitalizing DoD
utility systems. By allowing military installations to focus on core defense missions and
functions instead of the responsibilities of utility ownership, this program will transform how
installations obtain utility services. Activities will benefit from innovative industry practices, the
reliability of systems kept at current industry standards, and private sector financing and
efficiencies. Following Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (aa)) and
supplemental guidance issued by USD(AT&L) Memorandums (References (ab) and (ac)), the
DoD Components shall complete privatization decisions on all electric, water, wastewater, and
natural gas systems. Except where the Secretary of the Military Department has certified that the
systems are exempt due to security reasons, or where privatization is uneconomical, the Military
Services shall attempt to privatize those types of utility systems at every Active and Reserve
Component installation within and outside the United States that is not designated for closure
under a base closure law. Services must program sufficient funds to support privatization
contracts.

        (1) Margin of Error (MoE) Analysis. Due to a concern that the cost of continued
Government ownership has been overestimated and the cost of privatization has been
underestimated, DoD Components will incorporate MoE analysis in future utilities privatization
efforts. All feasible alternatives shall be evaluated in a manner that sustains the highest level of
confidence using prudent business analysis and judgment. The analysis must consider
quantifiable and non-quantifiable elements. The approach and assumptions used to conduct the
analysis should be documented in a business case to include process, rationales, and conclusions
that represent the most probable cost for the project. At a minimum, the DoD Components shall
value the following elements when conducting MoE analysis:

            (a) For the Government Estimate. O&M cost, recapitalization cost (if the
privatization agreement requires recapitalization by the contractor), discount rate, and inflation
rate (available from OMB Circular A-94 (Reference (ad))).

            (b) For the Contractor Cost Estimate. Taxes paid to the Federal Government and
inflation rate.

           (c) For Cost Realism. Consistency of proposal to request for proposals specifications
and predicted changes in future costs.

           (d) For Risk Assessment. Technical capability, quality management plan, and
overall impact on future funding.

         (2) Post-Conveyance Reviews. Recognizing the value of comparing actual cost to
projected results, DoD Components shall conduct a post-conveyance review of each privatized
system. To ensure its value, a review shall be conducted 2 to 3 years after award or 1 year after
the first price re-determination, whichever is later. This timeframe allows for proper contractor
transition and steady state operation. A post-conveyance review shall include, at a minimum,
joint detailed inventory, updated list of requirements reflecting changes, updated list of transition
requirements, updated list of deficiencies, contract cost changes due to updated inventory,



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             21                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

contract cost changes due to new connections or disconnects, and description of inventory
changes due to connections and disconnects. Costs shall be summed over the period from award
to analysis and compared to projections. Record of the original Government estimate and
contract cost shall be maintained until the analysis is performed. Contract cost shall be
normalized to the inflation factors in the Government estimate and any changes in mission or
regulatory environment. All analysis results shall be maintained until analysis of all
conveyances is complete.

        (3) Cost Growth Control. Post conveyance reviews will provide data to verify whether
there is a problem with cost growth on utilities’ privatization contracts. Once a utility system has
been privatized, the Government must enter into sole source negotiation for changes in inventory
and future price. Cost growth not associated with increases in inventory or normal consumer
prices will be readily identifiable through the post conveyance reviews. This information will
place the Government in a better position to negotiate the future contract price.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            22                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                            DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009

                                        GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AEMR                    Annual Energy Management Report
AMI                     advanced metering infrastructure
ASD(EI&E)               Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations, and
                        Environment

BMP                     best management practices

DCI                     defense critical infrastructure
DESC                    Defense Energy Support Center
DLA                     Defense Logistics Agency
DOE                     Department of Energy
DSNG                    direct supply natural gas
DSNGP                   Direct Supply Natural Gas Program

ECIP                    Energy Conservation Investment Program
EMCS                    Energy Management Control System
E.O.                    executive order
ESPC                    energy savings performance contract

GSA                     General Services Administration

IEM                     Installation Emergency Management

LDC                     local distribution company
LEED                    Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design

MDM                     meter data management
MILCON                  military construction
MoE                     margin of error

O&M                     operation and maintenance
OMB                     Office of Management and Budget

SIR                     savings to investment ratio
SSC                     Senior Sustainability Council

UESC                    utility energy services contract
UFC                     Unified Facilities Criteria
USD(AT&L)               Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
                        Logistics




Change 2, 08/31/2018                         23                                   GLOSSARY
                                                                DoDI 4170.11, December 11, 2009



                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.

critical energy requirements. Critical mission operations on military installations or facilities
that require a continuous supply of energy in the event of an energy disruption or emergency.

energy resilience. The ability to prepare for and recover from energy disruptions that impact
mission assurance on military installations.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             24                                    GLOSSARY
