o
                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 1401.03
                                                                                  June 13, 2014
                                                           Incorporating Change 3, April 5, 2023

                                                                                          IG DoD

SUBJECT:     DoD Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentality Employee Whistleblower Protection

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive reissues DoD Directive 1401.03 (Reference (a)) to establish policy
and assign responsibilities for nonappropriated fund instrumentality (NAFI) employee
whistleblower protection in accordance with section 1587 of Title 10, United States Code
(Reference (b)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive:

    a. Applies to the OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector General of
the Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all
other organizational entities in the DoD (referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD
Components”).

    b. Does not apply to employees in positions the President excludes from the coverage of
section 1587 of Reference (b), based on his or her determination that the exclusion is necessary
and warranted by conditions of good administration.


3. POLICY.

   a. All NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants for appointment to positions as
such employees (referred to in this directive as “applicants”) are encouraged to:

       (1) Report violations of law, rule, or regulation; mismanagement; a gross waste of funds;
an abuse of authority; or a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety.

       (2) File complaints of reprisal directly with the IG DoD. Enclosure 2 provides
information for filing a complaint of reprisal.
                                                                     DoDD 1401.03, June 13, 2014



    b. All NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants must be free from reprisal for
making protected disclosures, and their confidentiality is protected pursuant to section 1587 of
Reference (b) and consistent with the sections 401–424 of Title 5, United States Code (Reference
(c)), also known as the “Inspector General Act of 1978.”

    c. No civilian employee or member of the Armed Forces who has authority to take, direct
others to take, recommend, or approve any personnel action will, with respect to such authority,
take or fail to take or threaten to take or fail to take a personnel action with respect to any NAFI
employee, former employee, or applicant as a reprisal for making a protected disclosure.

   d. Violations of paragraph 3c:

        (1) By a person subject to the authority of chapter 47 of Reference (b), also known and
referred to in this directive as the “Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ),” are subject to
discipline as a violation of Articles 92 or 132 of the UCMJ.

        (2) By appropriated fund civilian employees of the DoD are subject to disciplinary
actions for misconduct pursuant to chapters 43 and 75 of Reference (c) or to other disciplinary
action.

      (3) By the NAFI employees of the DoD are subject to disciplinary actions pursuant to
Volume 1471 of DoD Instruction 1400.25 (Reference (d)).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 3.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. The changes to this issuance are administrative. They refine
definitions consistent with statutory text and update references and online availability of
information regarding submitting complaints.




Change 3, 4/5/2023                                2
                                                                DoDD 1401.03, June 13, 2014

7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective June 13, 2014.




                                            Robert O. Work
                                            Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Submitting a Reprisal Complaint
   3. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 3, 4/5/2023                          3
                                                                             DoDD 1401.03, June 13, 2014

                                              ENCLOSURE 1

                                               REFERENCES

(a) DoD Directive 1401.03, “DoD Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentality (NAFI) Employee
    Whistleblower Protection,” April 23, 2008 (hereby cancelled)
(b) Title 10, United States Code 1
(c) Title 5, United States Code 2
(d) DoD Instruction 1400.25, Volume 1471, “DoD Civilian Personnel Management System:
    Nonappropriated Fund (NAF) Labor-Management and Employee Relations,” March 27,
    2014, as amended
(e) DoD Instruction 5400.11, “DoD Privacy and Civil Liberties Programs,” January 29, 2019,
    as amended




1
 Chapter 47 of Title 10, United States Code is also known as the “Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ))”
2
 Sections 401-424 of Title 5, United States Code are also known as the “Inspector General Act of 1978,” as
amended


Change 3, 4/5/2023                                     4                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDD 1401.03, June 13, 2014

                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                          SUBMITTING A REPRISAL COMPLAINT


1. WHO IS ELIGIBLE TO FILE. NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants may
submit complaints of reprisal (pursuant to section 1587 of Reference (b)) to the IG DoD or other
DoD Component inspectors general (IGs). Complaints of reprisal made to DoD Component IGs
other than the IG DoD must be forwarded promptly to the IG DoD.


2. WHERE TO FILE. Individuals may submit reprisal complaints to the IG DoD through the
DoD Hotline Website at https://www.dodig.mil/hotline/, calling (800) 424-9098, or mailing a
letter addressed to:

   DoD Hotline
   The Pentagon
   Washington, DC 20301-1900


3. CONTENT OF COMPLAINT. To submit a reprisal complaint and assist in the review of the
complaint, employees, former employees, and applicants making complaints in accordance with
this directive should use the whistleblower reprisal complaint form on the DoD Hotline website
and provide as much of the following information as possible:

   a. Full name, grade, job title, organization, duty location, email address, telephone numbers,
and mailing address for receipt of correspondence from the IG DoD.

    b. A copy of the protected disclosure and any reply received. If unavailable, information
regarding the protected disclosure should include the date the protected disclosure was made and
to whom; the content of the protected disclosure; and whether, when, and by whom the matter
was investigated.

    c. The personnel action taken or withheld. Available documentation about the personnel
action or description of the type of personnel action and the date such action occurred or should
have occurred must be provided.

    d. To the extent possible, the full name, rank or grade, duty title, organization, duty location,
and telephone numbers of the officials believed to be responsible for taking, failing to take,
directing, threatening to take or fail to take, recommending or approving a personnel action,
alleged to be reprisal. Be prepared to provide any supporting evidence that may indicate that any
official involved in the personnel action knew of the protected disclosure before acting.

    e. For additional guidance, see the DoD Hotline Website at
https://www.dodig.mil/hotline/index.html.




Change 3, 4/5/2023                               5                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 1401.03, June 13, 2014

                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. IG DoD. In addition to the responsibilities in paragraph 3 of this enclosure, the IG DoD:

    a. Receives complaints of reprisal by NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants, and
determines whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant an investigation.

    b. Notifies the NAFI employee, former employee, or applicant if the IG DoD determines that
an investigation will not be conducted.

   c. Conducts an investigation if it is determined that investigation of a complaint of reprisal is
warranted. Upon completion of the investigation, provides the NAFI employee, former
employee, or applicant, and the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the
Director of Administration and Management (DA&M), with a report of the investigation.
Provides the DA&M with supporting documents relevant to the DA&M’s determination
concerning appropriate corrective or disciplinary action.

    d. Protects the confidentiality of NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants making
protected disclosures unless the IG DoD determines that disclosure of the employee’s, former
employee’s, or applicant’s identity is necessary to resolve their complaints.

   e. Ensures that matters reported by NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants in the
underlying protected disclosure are adequately addressed.


2. DA&M. The DA&M:

    a. Pending adjudication of a reprisal complaint, orders a temporary stay of a personnel action
when it is determined by the IG DoD that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a
personnel action was taken as reprisal for making a protected disclosure.

    b. Adjudicates complaints of reprisal based on reports submitted by the IG DoD and
recommends appropriate corrective and disciplinary actions.

    c. Protects the confidentiality of NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants making
protected disclosures unless the disclosure of the identity of the employee, former employee, or
applicant is necessary to perform the DA&M responsibilities in accordance with this directive.


3. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

     a. Ensure that NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants are advised of their right to
file complaints of reprisal directly to the IG DoD and of the procedures for doing so.



Change 3, 4/5/2023                               6                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDD 1401.03, June 13, 2014



    b. Protect the confidentiality of NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants making
protected disclosures, unless a responsible official within the DoD Component determines that
disclosure of the employee’s, former employee’s, or applicant’s identity is necessary to resolve
the complaints and such disclosure is permitted by law.

   c. Ensure that complaints of reprisal received from NAFI employees, former employees, or
applicants are promptly forwarded to the IG DoD.

   d. Implement any corrective action recommended by the DA&M, and provide the DA&M
and the IG DoD with a report on compliance.

    e. Consider the DA&M’s recommendations for disciplinary actions against those responsible
for reprisal against NAFI employees, former employees, or applicants for their protected
disclosure.

   f. Ensure any personally identifiable information is collected, maintained, disseminated, and
used in accordance with DoD Instruction 5400.11 (Reference (e)).

     g. Disseminate the content of this directive within their activities to ensure that NAFI
employees, former employees, or applicants fully understand the scope and application of the
directive. The information will specify that NAFI employees have the right, and are encouraged,
to disclose directly to the IG DoD suspected violations of law, rule, or regulation;
mismanagement; a gross waste of funds; an abuse of authority; or a substantial or specific danger
to public health or safety and any reprisals. The information will also include procedures for
filing complaints with their respective DoD Component IGs.




Change 3, 4/5/2023                              7                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDD 1401.03, June 13, 2014

                                           GLOSSARY


                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

DA&M      Director of Administration and Management


IG     Inspector General
IG DoD Inspector General of the Department of Defense


NAFI      nonappropriated fund instrumentality


UCMJ      Uniform Code of Military Justice


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

abuse of authority. An arbitrary and capricious exercise of power by a military member or a
Federal official or employee that adversely affects the rights of any person or that results in
personal gain or advantage to himself or herself or to preferred other persons.

applicant. Anyone who applies for employment as a NAFI employee as defined in section 1587
of Reference (b).

corrective action. Any action permitted by law that is deemed necessary by the DA&M to make
the complainant whole, such as reinstatement, promotion, reassignment, back pay, or changes in
DoD Component rules, regulations, or practices.

disciplinary action. An action against an offending employee or military member using the
applicable action procedures, or a referral to the U.S. Attorney General of any evidence of
criminal violation.

    A person subject to the UCMJ is subject to disciplinary actions pursuant to Articles 92 or 132
of the UCMJ.

   Civilian appropriated-funds employees of the DoD are subject to disciplinary actions in
accordance with chapters 43 and 75 of Reference (c).

   The NAFI employees of the DoD are subject to disciplinary actions pursuant to
Reference (d).




Change 3, 4/5/2023                               8                                     GLOSSARY
                                                                     DoDD 1401.03, June 13, 2014

gross waste of funds. An expenditure that is significantly out of proportion to the benefit
expected to accrue to the government.

mismanagement. Wrongful or arbitrary and capricious actions that may have an adverse effect
on the efficient accomplishment of the agency’s mission.

NAFI employee. Defined in section 1587 of Reference (b).

personnel action. With respect to a NAFI employee, former employee, or applicant:

   An appointment.

   A promotion.

   A disciplinary or corrective action.

   A detail, transfer, or reassignment.

   A reinstatement, restoration, or reemployment.

    A decision concerning pay, benefits, or awards, or concerning education or training if the
education or training may reasonably be expected to lead to an appointment, promotion, or other
action described in this section.

   Any other significant change in duties or responsibilities that is inconsistent with the
employee’s salary or grade level.

protected disclosure

    A disclosure of information by an employee, former employee, or applicant that the
employee, former employee, or applicant reasonably believes evidences a violation of any law,
rule, or regulation; mismanagement; a gross waste of funds; an abuse of authority; or a
substantial and specific danger to public health or safety, if such disclosure is not specifically
prohibited by law and if the information is not specifically required by or pursuant to executive
order to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or the conduct of foreign affairs; or

   A disclosure by an employee, former employee, or applicant to any civilian employee or
Service member designated by law or the Secretary of Defense to receive disclosures in
accordance with 1587(b)(1) of Reference (b) that the employee, former employee, or applicant
making the disclosure reasonably believes evidences a violation of any law, rule, or regulation;
mismanagement; a gross waste of funds; an abuse of authority; or a substantial and specific
danger to public health or safety.

reprisal. Taking, failing to take, or threatening to take or not take a personnel action because of a
protected disclosure of information.




Change 3, 4/5/2023                               9                                     GLOSSARY
