                            DOD INSTRUCTION 1025.02
    NATIONAL SECURITY EDUCATION PROGRAM (NSEP) AND
                NSEP SERVICE AGREEMENT

Originating Component:       Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness

Effective:                   January 3, 2017
Change 1 Effective:          November 23, 2022

Releasability:               Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division Website
                             at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Reissues and Cancels:     DoD Instruction 1025.02, “National Security Education Program,”
                          March 9, 2006
Incorporates and Cancels: DoD Instruction 1025.3, “Administrator, National Security Education
                          Program,” January 19, 1993, as amended
                          DoD Instruction 1025.5, “National Security Education Program (NSEP)
                          Grants to Institutions of Higher Education,” February 12, 1995
                          DoD Instruction 1025.6, “National Security Education Program (NSEP)
                          Service Agreement,” December 20, 1996

Approved by:                 Peter Levine, Performing the Duties of the Under Secretary of Defense for
                             Personnel and Readiness
Change 1 Approved by:        Ann Y. Lee, Acting Executive Director, Office of the Under Secretary of
                             Defense for Personnel and Readiness


Purpose: In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5124.02, this issuance:
• Establishes DoD policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures and requirements for
administering and executing the NSEP service agreement in accordance with Sections 1901-1912 of
Chapter 37 of Title 50, United States Code (U.S.C.).
•   Modifies requirements related to the NSEP service agreement.
•   Assigns oversight of NSEP to the Defense Language and National Security Education Office.
                                                                                                 DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                                                  Change 1, November 23, 2022

                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Policy. ............................................................................................................................... 3
   1.3. Information Collections. ................................................................................................... 4
   1.4. Summary of Change 1. ..................................................................................................... 4
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES ......................................................................................................... 5
   2.1. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness (ASD(R)). ................................................ 5
   2.2 Director, DoD Human Resources Activity (DoDHRA). ................................................... 5
SECTION 3: NSEP AWARD RECIPIENTS ........................................................................................... 6
SECTION 4: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO NSEP AWARD RECIPIENTS .......... 8
   4.1. NSEP Service Agreement. ................................................................................................ 8
   4.2. Implementation. ................................................................................................................ 8
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 11
   G.1. Acronyms. ...................................................................................................................... 11
   G.2. Definitions. ..................................................................................................................... 11
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 14




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                                   DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                    Change 1, November 23, 2022

               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY. This issuance applies to:

    a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint
Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Defense,
the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the DoD
(referred to collectively in this issuance as the “DoD Components”).

    b. The administrative agent. If the administrative agent is an entity outside of DoD pursuant
to a DoD contract, grant, or cooperative agreement, then DoD personnel will ensure that the
relevant contract, grant, or cooperative agreement aligns with the policies and procedures in this
issuance.

   c. All recipients of awards by NSEP.


1.2. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. NSEP assist in making available to DoD and other Federal entities, as applicable,
personnel possessing proficiency in languages and foreign regional expertise critical to national
security by providing scholarships and fellowships pursuant to Section 1902(a) of Chapter 37 of
Title 50, U.S.C. These scholarships and fellowships will be awarded to:

        (1) Students who are U.S. citizens, to pursue qualifying undergraduate and graduate
study in domestic and foreign education systems to assist in meeting national security needs for
professionals with in-depth knowledge of world languages and cultures, and who enter into an
NSEP service agreement as required by Section 1902(b) of Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C.

        (2) Students who are U.S. citizens who are native speakers of a foreign language
identified as critical to the national security of the United States, but who are not proficient at a
professional level in the English language with respect to reading, writing, and other skills, to
enable such students to pursue English language studies at institutions of higher education.
Recipients must agree to enter into an NSEP service agreement as required by Section 1902(b) of
Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C.

    b. Grants will be awarded to institutions of higher education for programs in critical areas
pursuant to Sections 1902(a) and 1902(f) of Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C., to implement a
national system of programs to produce advanced language expertise critical to the national
security of the United States.

    c. An NSEP award recipient must enter into an NSEP service agreement before receipt of an
award as required by Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C. The award recipient must agree to maintain
satisfactory academic progress and work in fulfillment of the NSEP service agreement until all
service requirements are satisfied.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                             3
                                                               DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                Change 1, November 23, 2022
    d. All NSEP award recipients who are government employees or members of the uniformed
services at the time of award must confirm that they have resigned from such employment or
service before receiving support for their NSEP-funded overseas study. These stipulations apply
to all individuals, including employees of a department, agency, or entity of the U.S.
Government and members of the uniformed services, including members of a Reserve
Component of the uniformed services. Reserve Officer Training Corps participants who are also
members of a Reserve Component must be in an inactive, non-drilling status during the course of
their NSEP-funded overseas study.

    e. Neither DoD nor the U.S. Government is obligated to provide, or offer work or
employment to, award recipients as a result of participation in the program. All f Federal
agencies are encouraged to assist in placing NSEP award recipients upon successful completion
of the program.


1.3. INFORMATION COLLECTIONS. DD Form 2753, “NSEP Service Agreement Report
(SAR) for Scholarship and Fellowship Awards,” referred to in Paragraph 3.i and Paragraph 4.2.g
of this issuance, has been assigned Office of Management and Budget control number 0704-0368
in accordance with the procedures in Volume 2 of DoD Manual 8910.01. The expiration date of
this information collection is listed on the DoD Information Collections System at
https://www.esd.whs.mil/Directives/forms/.


1.4. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles, websites, and references for currency and accuracy.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                         4
                                                                  DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                   Change 1, November 23, 2022

                           SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR READINESS (ASD(R)). Under the
authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)), the ASD(R):

    a. Develops programs, processes, and policies to support NSEP award recipients in fulfilling
their NSEP service agreement through internships or employment in Federal service pursuant to
Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C.

    b. Determines, pursuant to Section 1902(a) of Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C., after
consultation with the National Security Education Board, which countries, languages, and
disciplines are critical and in which there are deficiencies of knowledgeable personnel within
Federal entities.


2.2 DIRECTOR, DOD HUMAN RESOURCES ACTIVITY (DODHRA). Under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), in consultation with the ASD(R), and in
accordance with DoD Directive 5100.87, the Director, DoDHRA, provides:

    a. Program and budget management and other administrative, facility, operational, and
logistic support for NSEP.

   b. Fiscal management and oversight to ensure all funds provided for NSEP are separately
and visibly accounted for in the DoD budget.

    c. Makes available competitive scholarship, fellowship, and English for Heritage Language
Speakers (EHLS) awards to U.S. citizens who wish to engage in study for the purposes of
national security in accordance with Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C.

   d. Manages, oversees, and monitors compliance of NSEP service agreements.

   e. Advises NSEP award recipients who are seeking Federal or national security positions on
how to fulfill their NSEP service agreement in national security positions.

    f. Maintains documentation of successful completion of Federal service or initiates debt
collection procedures for those NSEP recipients who fail to comply with the NSEP service
agreement.

    g. Works with agencies or offices in the U.S. Government to identify potential employment
opportunities for NSEP award recipients and make employment opportunities and information
readily available to all award recipients.

    h. Approves or disapproves all DD Form 2753 written requests for service credit, deferrals,
extensions, or waivers of the NSEP service agreement, including adjudication of all cases
involving award recipients who decline job offers.



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       5
                                                                  DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                   Change 1, November 23, 2022

                      SECTION 3: NSEP AWARD RECIPIENTS

The award recipient of any scholarship or fellowship award through NSEP will:

    a. Maintain satisfactory academic progress in the course of study for which assistance is
provided, according to the regularly prescribed standards and practices of the institution in which
the award recipient is matriculating.

   b. As a condition of receiving an award, sign an NSEP service agreement as required by
Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C., which among other requirements, must acknowledge an
understanding and agreement by the award recipient that failure to maintain satisfactory
academic progress constitutes grounds upon which the award may be terminated and trigger the
mandatory requirement to return to the U.S. Treasury the scholarship, fellowship, or EHLS funds
provided to the award recipient.

   c. Notify the Director, DoDHRA, within 10 business days if advised of failure to maintain
academic progress by the institution of matriculation.

   d. Notify the Director, DoDHRA, in a timely manner and in advance of the service deadline
should any request for deferral, extension, or waiver become necessary.

        (1) Deferrals. NSEP award recipients actively seeking to fulfill the NSEP service
agreement in a well-documented manner may request approval of a 1-year extension of their
service deadline. Approvals of deferrals for pursuit of education will be considered on a case-
by-case basis. Renewal of a deferral may be granted if adequately justified.

        (2) Extensions. A thorough outline describing all further plans to complete the NSEP
service agreement must accompany all extension requests. No more than two extensions may be
granted to an NSEP award recipient.

       (3) Waivers.

            (a) In extraordinary circumstances, an NSEP award recipient may be relieved of
responsibilities associated with the NSEP service agreement. As a result of receiving a waiver,
the award recipient will no longer receive job search assistance from NSEP; is no longer a
beneficiary of the special hiring advantages available to award recipients who have a service
requirement; and will not be eligible to receive NSEP letters of certification, or endorsements or
recommendations. Upon request, the NSEP office will continue to certify that the award
recipient received an NSEP scholarship or fellowship.

            (b) The Director, DoDHRA, will consider requests for extensions and waivers of the
NSEP service agreement only under special circumstances as defined in Section 4 of this
issuance. The request must set forth the basis, situation, and causes which support the requested
action, including evidence to support the request. The award recipient must submit requests
electronically on www.nsepnet.org or to nsep@nsep.gov. Final approval of work in fulfillment
of the NSEP service agreement, deferrals, extensions, and waivers rest with, and are at the
discretion of, the Director, DoDHRA.


SECTION 3: NESP AWARD RECIPIENTS                                                                     6
                                                                 DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                  Change 1, November 23, 2022
    e. Immediately upon successful completion of the award program and either completion of
the degree for which the award recipient is matriculated or withdrawal from such degree
program, begin the Federal job search. Award recipients should concurrently seek positions
within DoD, any element of the Intelligence Community, Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), or Department of State (DoS).

    f. Work to satisfy all service requirements in accordance with applicable NSEP service
agreements until all NSEP service requirements are satisfied. Work in fulfillment of the NSEP
service agreement must be wholly completed within 5 years of the award recipient’s first date of
service unless an approved deferral or extension has been granted.

   g. Work for the total period of time specified in the NSEP service agreement either
consecutively in one organization, or through follow-on employment in two or more
organizations.

   h. Repay the U.S. Treasury the award funds provided to the award recipient if the
requirements of the NSEP service agreement are not met.

    i. Submit DD Form 2753 to NSEP no later than 1 month after termination of the period of
study funded by NSEP and annual reports thereafter until the NSEP service requirement is
satisfied. The DD Form 2753 will include:

       (1) Any requests for deferrals, extensions, or waivers with adequate evidence and
support for such requests.

        (2) The award recipient’s current status (e.g., not yet graduated from, or terminated
enrollment in, the degree program pursued while receiving NSEP support; engaged in work in
fulfillment of the requirement.)

       (3) Updated contact information.

    j. Notify the Director, DoDHRA, within 10 business days of any changes to the award
recipient’s mailing address.




SECTION 3: NESP AWARD RECIPIENTS                                                                7
                                                                     DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                      Change 1, November 23, 2022

    SECTION 4: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO
                   NSEP AWARD RECIPIENTS

4.1. NSEP SERVICE AGREEMENT. Award recipients of any scholarship, fellowship, or
EHLS award through this program must comply with the terms of the NSEP service agreement
they signed. NSEP awards entered into before the date of this issuance will be governed by the
laws, regulations, and policies in effect at the time that the award was made. The NSEP service
agreement for recipients awarded as of the date of this issuance will:

    a. In accordance with Section 1902(b) of Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C., outlines
requirements for NSEP award recipients to fulfill their Federal service requirement through work
in positions that contribute to the national security of the United States. An emphasis is placed
on work within one of four organizations: DoD, any element of the Intelligence Community,
DHS, or DoS. On a case-by-case basis, NSEP may consider employment with a Federal
contractor of one of these four priority organizations as meeting the service requirement should
the award recipient provide adequate documentary evidence that the salary for the position is
funded by the U.S. Government.

    b. Stipulate that absent the availability of a suitable position in the four priority organizations
or a contractor thereof, award recipients may satisfy the service requirement by serving in any
Federal agency or office in a position with national security responsibilities. It will also stipulate
that absent the availability of a suitable position in DoD, any element of the Intelligence
Community, DHS, DoS, a contractor thereof, or any Federal agency with national security
responsibilities, award recipients may satisfy the service requirement by working in the field of
education in a discipline related to the study supported by the program if the recipient
satisfactorily demonstrates to the Secretary of Defense through the Director, NSEP, that no
position is available in the departments, agencies, and offices covered by Paragraph 4.1.a.


4.2. IMPLEMENTATION. The NSEP service agreement will be implemented as follows:

    a. Prior to receiving assistance, the award recipient must sign an NSEP service agreement.
The award recipient will submit to the NSEP Administrative Agent, in advance of program of
study start date, any proposed changes to the approved award program (i.e., course and schedule
changes, withdrawals, course or program incompletions, unanticipated or increased costs)

    b. The minimum length of service requirement for undergraduate scholarship, graduate
fellowship, and EHLS award recipients is 1 year. The duration of the service requirement for
graduate fellowship award recipients is equal to the duration of assistance provided by NSEP.

   c. In accordance with Section 1902(b) of Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C., undergraduate
scholarship students must begin fulfilling the NSEP service agreement within 3 years of
completion or termination of their undergraduate degree program.




SECTION 4: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO NSEP AWARD RECIPIENTS                           8
                                                                   DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                    Change 1, November 23, 2022
    d. In accordance with Section 1902(b) of Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C., graduate fellowship
students must begin fulfilling the NSEP service agreement within 2 years of completion or
termination of their graduate degree program.

    e. In accordance with Section 1902(b) of Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C., EHLS award
recipients must begin fulfilling the service requirement within 3 years of completion of their
program.

    f. The award recipient must accept a reasonable offer of employment, as defined by the
Director, NSEP, or his or her designee, in accordance with the NSEP service agreement, at a
salary deemed by the hiring organization as commensurate with the award recipient’s education
level, and consistent with the terms and conditions of the NSEP service agreement.

    g. The award recipient will annually submit a DD Form 2753 to NSEP until all NSEP
service agreement requirements are satisfied. The DD Form 2753 must be received and
reviewed by the NSEP Service Approval Committee. The receipt of a completed DD Form 2753
will be acknowledged through official correspondence from NSEP. Award recipients who do
not submit the DD Form 2753 as required will be notified by NSEP of the intent to pursue
collection action.

    h. If the award recipient fails to maintain satisfactory academic progress for any term in
which assistance is provided, probationary measures of the host institution will apply to the
award recipient. Failure to meet the institution’s requirements to resume satisfactory academic
progress within the prescribed guidelines of the institution will result in the termination of
assistance to the award recipient.

    i. Extenuating circumstances, such as illness of the award recipient or a close relative, death
of a close relative, or an interruption of study caused by the host institution, may be considered
acceptable reasons for non-satisfactory academic progress. The award recipient must notify the
NSEP Administrative Agent of any extenuating circumstances within 10 business days of
occurrence. The NSEP Administrative Agent will review these requests to determine what
course of action is appropriate and make a recommendation to NSEP for final determination.
The Director, DoDHRA, will upon receipt of the NSEP Administrative Agent recommendation,
determine by what conditions to terminate or reinstate the award to the award recipient.

    j. NSEP award recipients may apply to the Director, DoDHRA, for a deferral of the NSEP
service agreement requirement if pursuing qualified further education.

    k. NSEP award recipients may apply to the Director, DoDHRA, to receive an extension of
the NSEP service agreement requirement if actively seeking to fulfill the NSEP service
agreement in a well-documented manner.

    l. In extraordinary circumstances an NSEP award recipient may request a waiver to be
relieved of responsibilities associated with the NSEP service agreement. Conditions for
requesting a waiver to the NSEP service agreement may include:

       (1) Situations in which compliance is either impossible or would involve extreme
hardship to the award recipient.


SECTION 4: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO NSEP AWARD RECIPIENTS                            9
                                                                  DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                   Change 1, November 23, 2022
       (2) Interruptions in service due to temporary physical or medical disability or other
causes beyond the award recipient’s control.

       (3) Unreasonable delays in the hiring process not caused by the award recipient,
including delays in obtaining a security clearance if required for employment.

       (4) Hiring freezes that adversely affect award recipients who are seeking positions with
the U.S. Government.

         (5) Permanent physical or medical disability that prevent the award recipient from
fulfilling the obligation.

        (6) Inability to complete the NSEP service agreement due to terminations or
interruptions of work beyond the award recipient’s control.

       (7) Death of the award recipient.

    m. In cases where assistance to the award recipient is terminated, the amount owed to the
U.S. Government is equal to the support received from NSEP. Repayment to the U.S. Treasury
must be made within a period not to exceed 6 months from expiration of the service deadline.
Noncompliance with repayment requirements will result in the initiation of standard U.S.
Government collection procedures to obtain payment for overdue indebtedness, unless a waiver
is specifically granted by the Director, DoDHRA. Further job search assistance to an award
recipient will be denied if any outstanding debt remains unpaid as a result of an award
termination.

         (1) Repayment to the U.S. Treasury for the amount of assistance provided becomes due,
either in whole or in part, if the award recipient fails to fulfill the NSEP service agreement.
Award recipients who do not submit the SAR as required will be notified by NSEP of the intent
to pursue collection action. Noncompliance with repayment requirements will result in the
initiation of standard U.S. Government collection procedures to obtain payment for overdue
indebtedness, unless a waiver is specifically granted by the Director, DoDHRA.

       (2) Repayment recovery procedures will include one or a combination of the following:

           (a) Voluntary repayment schedule arranged between the award recipient and the
administrative agent.

          (b) Deduction from accrued pay, compensation, amount of retirement credit, or any
other amount due the employee from the U.S. Government.

          (c) Such other methods as are provided by law for recovery of amounts owed to the
U.S. Government.




SECTION 4: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO NSEP AWARD RECIPIENTS                     10
                                                                   DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                    Change 1, November 23, 2022

                                          GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

 ASD(R)        Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness

 DHS           Department of Homeland Security
 DoDHRA        DoD Human Resources Activity
 DoS           Department of State

 EHLS          English for Heritage Language Speakers

 NSEP          National Security Education Program

 SAR           Service Agreement Report

 USD(P&R) Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness



G.2. DEFINITIONS. These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

administrative agent. Organization that will administer, direct, and manage resources for
NSEP.

Boren Fellowship. A competitive award granted for graduate study under NSEP.

Boren Scholarship. A competitive award granted for undergraduate study abroad under NSEP.

critical area. Determined by the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the members of the
National Security Education Board, in accordance with Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C., and
Section 1903 of Chapter 37 of Title 50, U.S.C.

critical foreign language. Determined by the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the
members of the National Security Education Board in accordance with Chapter 37 of Title 50,
U.S.C.

deferral of the NSEP service agreement. Official NSEP documentation signed by the
Director, NSEP, or his or her designee, by which an NSEP award recipient pursuing approved,
qualified further education is allowed to postpone meeting the service deadline.

    A deferral reschedules the date by which an NSEP award recipient must begin to fulfill
service.

    Qualified further education includes, but is not limited to, no less than half-time enrollment
in any degree-granting, accredited institution of higher education worldwide or participation in



GLOSSARY                                                                                         11
                                                                  DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                   Change 1, November 23, 2022
an academic fellowship program (e.g. Fulbright Fellowship, Thomas R. Pickering Foreign
Affairs Fellowship).

   A deferral is calculated by first calculating the length of enrollment in the degree program
from start date to anticipated graduation date, and then adding the length of enrollment in the
degree program to the service deadline.

   Approvals of deferrals will be considered on a case-by-case basis.

extension of the NSEP service agreement. Official NSEP documentation, signed by the
Director, DoDHRA, by which an NSEP award recipient who has completed award requirements,
reached the service deadline, and is actively seeking to fulfill the NSEP service agreement in a
well-documented manner is allowed to extend the service deadline. An extension reschedules
the date by which an NSEP award recipient must complete the service required in the NSEP
service agreement.

Intelligence Community. The U.S. Intelligence Community is a coalition of 17 agencies and
organizations within the Executive Branch that work both independently and collaboratively to
gather the intelligence necessary to conduct foreign relations and national security activities.

language proficiency. The U.S. Government relies on the Interagency Language Roundtable
scale to determine language proficiency. According to the scale:

   0 is No Proficiency.

   0+ is Memorized Proficiency.

   1 is Elementary Proficiency.

   1+ is Elementary Proficiency, Plus.

   2 is Limited Working Proficiency.

   2+ is Limited Working Proficiency, Plus.

   3 is General Professional Proficiency.

   3+ is General Professional Proficiency, Plus.

   4 is Advanced Professional Proficiency.

   4+ is Advanced Professional Proficiency, Plus.

   5 is Functional Native Proficiency.

NSEP Service Approval Committee. Committee of key NSEP staff members who review the
merits of all requests for service credit, deferrals, extensions, or waivers of the NSEP service
agreement, including adjudication of all cases involving award recipients who decline job offers,
in order to provide recommendations to the Director, NSEP.


GLOSSARY                                                                                          12
                                                                 DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                                  Change 1, November 23, 2022
program end date. Official end of an NSEP award recipient’s program, as set forth within the
individual’s NSEP service agreement.

Reserve Officer Training Corps. College program offered at colleges and universities across
the United States that prepares young adults to become officers in the U.S. Military. In exchange
for a paid college education and a guaranteed post-college career, cadets commit to serve in the
Military after graduation. Each Service branch has its own take on Reserve Officer Training
Corps.

request of service credit in fulfillment of the NSEP service agreement. Written request made
through submission of a DD Form 2753 to the NSEP office, documenting how employment an
NSEP award recipient held or holds complies with fulfillment of the NSEP service agreement.

other Federal agencies. Includes any Federal Government agency, department, bureau, office
or any other Federal Government organization of any nature other than the DoD or any
component, agency, department, field activity or any other subcomponent of any kind within or
subordinate to the DoD.

satisfactory academic progress. Maintenance of academic standards at both home and host
institution(s) for every NSEP award recipient for the duration of the study program and as
defined in each NSEP service agreement.

service deadline. Date by which NSEP award recipient must begin to fulfill the NSEP service
agreement.

waiver of the NSEP service agreement. Official NSEP documentation, signed by the Director,
DoDHRA, by which an NSEP award recipient is relieved of responsibilities associated with the
NSEP service agreement.

work in fulfillment of the NSEP service agreement. Upon completion of the NSEP award
recipient’s study program, such individual must seek employment in the DoD, Homeland
Security, DoS, or the Intelligence Community, or if no suitable position is available, anywhere in
the U.S. Government in a position with national security responsibilities. If such individual is
unsuccessful in finding a Federal position after making a good faith effort to do so, award
recipient agrees to seek employment in the field of education in a position related to the study
supported by such scholarship or fellowship. The award recipient further agrees to fulfill the
service requirement through one of the outlined three options.




GLOSSARY                                                                                       13
                                                          DoDI 1025.02, January 3, 2017
                                                           Change 1, November 23, 2022

                                   REFERENCES
DoD Directive 5100.87, “DoD Human Resources Activity (DoDHRA),” February 19, 2008,
   as amended
DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
   (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 2, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for DoD
   Public Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
United States Code, Title 50




REFERENCES                                                                          14
