                               Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION
                                                                             NUMBER 2015.4
                                                                                   February 7, 2002
                                                            Incorporating Change 1, August 31, 2018


                                                                                        USD(A&S)

SUBJECT: Defense Research, Development, Test and Evaluation (RDT&E) Information
         Exchange Program (IEP)

References: (a) DoD Instruction 2015.4, "Mutual Weapons Development Data
                     Exchange Program (MWDDEP) and Defense Development Exchange
                 Program," November 5, 1963 (hereby canceled)
             (b) DoD Directive 5134.1, "Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
                 Technology and Logistics (USD(AT&L))," April 21, 2000
             (c) Section 2358 of title 10, United States Code
             (d) Director, International Cooperation Memorandum, "DoD-wide
                 Implementation of the Statement of Principles between the
                 Department of Defense and the Department of Commerce concerning the
                 Interagency Consultation Process for Acquisition, Technology and
                 Logistics-related International Agreements," December 13, 2000
             (e) through (h), see enclosure 1


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE
This Instruction reissues reference (a) to:

     1.1. Implement the responsibilities of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)), for entering into RDT&E exchanges with allied
and friendly nations, as assigned in subparagraphs 3.2.10. and 3.2.16. of reference (b).

     1.2. Update procedures and responsibilities for carrying out RDT&E information
exchanges with allied and friendly nations to facilitate international cooperative research and
development projects and research conducted under reference (c).
                                                               DODI 2015.4, February 7, 2002



2. APPLICABILITY
This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office
of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as "the DoD Components").


3. DEFINITIONS
Terms used in this Instruction are defined in enclosure 2.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    4.1. The Director, International Cooperation under the Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, shall:

          4.1.1. Provide policy guidance, oversight, and procedures for RDT&E
information exchanges.

          4.1.2. Ensure that there is overall equitability in the flow of information with
partner nations, consistent with national security policy and DoD security policy.

          4.1.3. Arbitrate IEP issues with the DoD Components.

          4.1.4. Coordinate with the Department of Commerce to resolve disputes
concerning proposed IEP Annexes in accordance with Director, International Cooperation
Memorandum (reference (d)).

     4.2. The General Counsel of the Department of Defense shall ensure that negotiation
and conclusion of IEP agreements shall be sufficient legally and shall conform to the
requirements of DoD Directive 5530.3 (reference (e)).

     4.3. The Secretaries of the Military Departments are delegated authority to negotiate
and conclude IEP annexes and shall:

          4.3.1. Comply with all laws and regulations and protect the rights of third parties
in information that is to be exchanged.




  Change 1, 08/31/2018                             2
                                                                DODI 2015.4, February 7, 2002



           4.3.2. Ensure that authority to exchange the information covered by the annex
(e.g., Delegation of Disclosure Authority Letters (DDLs)) has been issued by the proper
authorities.

          4.3.3. Before concluding an annex, provide a copy to the Department of
Commerce for comment and a copy to the Director, International Cooperation (IC), for
information in accordance with Director, International Cooperation Memorandum (reference
(d)).

          4.3.4. Ensure that IEP annexes include the equitable exchange of information,
consistent with national security policy and DoD security policy. Monitor the flow of
information in annexes under their cognizance; and take action, where necessary, in
coordination with the Director, IC, to ensure that overall equitability between the partner
nation and the annexes of all three Military Services is achieved.

          4.3.5. Provide a copy of each concluded annex to the Director, IC.

           4.3.6. Conduct initial and periodic technical project officer (TPO) IEP
management and responsibilities training, maintain a tracking and reporting database, and a
distribution system for IEP information.

          4.3.7. Provide the Director, IC, with current status information of IEP agreements
and annexes under their cognizance.

          4.3.8. Conduct periodic bilateral and multilateral reviews with partner nations of
IEPs to coordinate their management.

          4.3.9. Conduct periodic internal reviews of IEPs for which they are responsible.
Such reviews shall include assessment of the desirability of revising or terminating annexes
that either have been inactive for a period of 5 years or that lack significant activity. They
shall also assess the need for new annexes.

5. PROCEDURES

     5.1. In order to foster a climate conducive to the establishment of international
cooperative research and development projects, and to improve the results of research and
development that is conducted under 10 U.S.C. 2358 (reference (c)), the Department of
Defense encourages the exchange of information on RDT&E activities with allied and
friendly nations. All DoD Components shall encourage RDT&E information exchanges.
The exchanges shall be consistent with the DoD principles governing IEPs (enclosure 3), and
shall support the following objectives to:




  Change 1, 08/31/2018                             3
                                                               DODI 2015.4, February 7, 2002



          5.1.1. Explore opportunities for and promote future international RDT&E
cooperation, standardization and interoperability.

          5.1.2. Establish and/or nurture relationships between the technical communities
of the U.S. Government and the technical communities of other nations (for the future
acquisitions and promoting broader defense relationships).

          5.1.3. Be aware of developments outside the United States in defense and
defense-related RDT&E (for future acquisitions).

          5.1.4. Learn what other nations are developing (for acquisition and broader
defense planning activities).

          5.1.5. Impart to partner nations the U.S. vision of the potential impact of
information exchanges on various defense equipment programs (for acquisition and broader
defense planning activities).

          5.1.6. Reduce costs by avoiding unnecessary duplication of RDT&E efforts.

     5.2. IEP agreements, with allied and friendly nations, which are covered by this
Instruction, are for promoting cooperative research and development through the exchange of
RDT&E information.

     5.3. All IEP agreements, and associated annexes, shall:

          5.3.1. Have defined boundaries on the information to be exchanged.

          5.3.2. State that the information exchanged may be used by the partner nation
solely for informational and evaluational purposes.

     5.4. Besides the exchange of RDT&E information, IEP agreements and annexes shall
promote the exchange of visits between technical personnel, by providing the official sanction
and encouragement for routine dialog and creating a framework for such dialog.

     5.5. Agreements covered by this Instruction shall not authorize the transfer of the
following:

          5.5.1. Materials and/or equipment;

          5.5.2. Technical data packages;

          5.5.3. Production and/or manufacturing information and data packages;




  Change 1, 08/31/2018                             4
                                                               DODI 2015.4, February 7, 2002



         5.5.4. Price and availability information on U.S. production and/or operational
systems; and/or,

         5.5.5. Money.

    5.6. IEP agreements and annexes shall contain procedures that expedite the exchange
of RDT&E information.

     5.7. IEP agreements and/or annexes may authorize information exchanges between the
Department of Defense and the defense organization (department or ministry; etc.) of allied
and friendly nations and their agents.

     5.8. The most current approved version of the DoD international agreements generator
shall be used for preparing IEP agreements, in accordance with the Deputy Secretary of
Defense Memorandum (reference (f)).

     5.9. Existing bilateral or multilateral agreements and their existing annexes are not
required to be amended merely to comply with this Instruction. All new IEP agreements,
including any new IEP annexes, to new or existing umbrella agreements, shall be consistent
with this Instruction.

    5.10. Without separate authority to release, neither classified nor controlled unclassified
information may be transferred under IEP agreements or annexes. Authority to release
classified information shall be in accordance with NDP - 1 (reference (g)), and shall be
provided by such instruments as the DDLs. DDLs, which vary from country-to-country and
from technology-to-technology, shall not be disclosed to the partner nation. Authority to
release controlled unclassified information must be provided by the controlling authority.
IEP agreements merely serve as the vehicles for the actual transfer of classified or
unclassified information.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility
for this Instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in
accordance with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (h)).




  Change 1, 08/31/2018                            5
                                                  DODI 2015.4, February 7, 2002



7. EFFECTIVE DATE AND IMPLEMENTATION
This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 3
    E1. References, continued
    E2. Definitions
    E3. Principles for RDT&E IEP Agreements




  Change 1, 08/31/2018                        6
                                                               DODI 2015.4, February 7, 2002




                                   E1. ENCLOSURE 1
                                 REFERENCES, continued


(e) DoD Directive 5530.3, "International Agreements," June 11, 1987
(f) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, "Streamlining the Development of International
    Research and Development (R&D) Agreements," September 14, 1994
(g) National Disclosure Policy - 1, "National Policy and Procedures for the Disclosure of
    Classified Military Information to Foreign Governments and International Organizations"
    (short title: National Disclosure Policy (NDP-1)), October 2, 2000
(h) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary of
    Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018




Change 1, 08/31/2018                            7                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DODI 2015.4, February 7, 2002




                                       E2. ENCLOSURE 2
                                          DEFINITIONS


E2.1. DEFINED TERMS

     E2.1.1. Classified Information. Official information that requires protection for
national security and is so designated by the application of a security classification marking.

      E2.1.2. Controlled Unclassified Information. Unclassified information to which
access or distribution limitations have been applied in accordance with applicable national
laws or regulations. Whether the information is provided or generated under an agreement,
the information shall be marked to identify its "in confidence" nature. It could include
information, which has been declassified, but remains controlled.

      E2.1.3. IEP Agreement. A bilateral or multilateral international agreement, entered into
under the information exchange program established by this Instruction, between the
Department of Defense or a DoD Component, and one or more foreign governmental entities,
for the exchange of RDT&E information.

     E2.1.4. IEP Annex. A supplementary annex to an IEP agreement that identifies specific,
potential information exchange opportunities on which the Department of Defense or a DoD
Component, and one or more foreign governmental entities, may wish to exchange RDT&E
information. An IEP annex is not an international agreement.

      E2.1.5. Information. Knowledge acquired in any manner by study or observation and
the ideas inferred, regardless of form or type, including but not limited to, that of a scientific,
technical, business, financial or programmatic nature, and also including photographs,
reports, manuals, threat data, experimental data, test data, designs, specifications, processes,
techniques, drawings, technical writings, sound recordings, magnetic media, pictorial
representations and other graphical presentations, whether on magnetic tape or disk,
computer memory or any other form, and whether or not subject to copyright, patent, or other
legal protection.

     E2.1.6. Information Exchange Program (IEP). The program established under this
Instruction for the exchange of RDT&E information under a bilateral or multilateral, stand-
alone or umbrella, international agreement, between the Department of Defense or a DoD
Component, and one or more foreign governmental entities.

     E2.1.7. Technical Data. Any information or knowledge on RDT&E including
scientific, technical, performance, business, contractual, administrative, financial
information, software and source code, regardless of form or type.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                                8                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DODI 2015.4, February 7, 2002




                                      E3. ENCLOSURE 3

                       PRINCIPLES FOR RDT&E IEP AGREEMENTS


E3.1. PRINCIPLES

     E3.1.1. The benefits of obtaining RDT&E information through exchange are, as follows:

           E3.1.1.1. To see different ways of approaching a similar technical challenge (possibly as
a result of different engineering cultures).

         E3.1.1.2. To identify and/or reveal technical approaches that either do or do not
provide good results, and to avoid the cost of duplicating RDT&E.

          E3.1.1.3. To expand the RDT&E information base.

     E3.1.2. The scope of annexes shall be broad enough to allow sufficient flexibility in use
of annexes over their life to follow changes in RDT&E information and evolving military
requirements. The duration of IEP annexes shall be between 5 and 10 years with an option
for extension for a further period. Factors to consider in determining the scope and duration
of individual annexes include the goals of the annex, the technology being addressed, and the
objectives and requirements of the partner nation.

     E3.1.3. TPOs for annexes shall be empowered and trusted. The DoD Components
shall establish controls and shall ensure maintenance of records of information that is
exchanged.

     E3.1.4. Classified information shall be treated as a national security asset that shall be
protected and conserved, and may be shared with foreign governments and international
organizations, only, where there is a clearly defined advantage to the United States.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                               9                                ENCLOSURE 3
