                                 Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                              NUMBER 3000.06
                                                                                    June 27, 2013
                                                    Incorporating Change 1, Effective July 8, 2016

                                                                                              DCMO

SUBJECT: Combat Support Agencies (CSAs)

References:    See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 3000.06 (Reference (a)) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities for CSAs, pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by Title
10, United States Code (Reference (b)). This directive is to be interpreted consistent with the
law, DoD issuances, and policy, including those pertaining to the Director of National
Intelligence.

   b. Incorporates and cancels Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (c)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands
(CCMDs), the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred
to collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. CSAs designated pursuant to section 193 of Reference (b) fulfill combat support functions
for joint operating forces across the range of military operations, and in support of Combatant
Commanders (CCDRs) executing military operations. CSAs perform support functions or
provide supporting operational capabilities, consistent with their establishing directives and
pertinent DoD planning guidance.

    b. The combat support mission of a CSA is that portion of its mission involving support for
operating forces engaged in planning for, or conducting, military operations, including support
during conflict or in the conduct of other military activities related to countering threats to U.S.
                                                                    DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013


national security. This mission is focused on providing support to echelons at the CCMD level
and below and may not encompass the full scope of the CSA’s mission.

    c. A CSA will provide and plan for the optimum support capabilities attainable within
existing and programmed resources to the operational commanders within the parameters of the
CSA’s statutory responsibilities and its chartering DoDD. For these purposes, CSAs will
participate fully in the Joint Strategic Planning System and the Adaptive Planning and Execution
System to define current joint warfighting capability needs and will utilize the Joint Capabilities
Integration and Development System (JCIDS) to define and validate future joint warfighting
capability needs.

    d. The relationship between a CSA and a CCMD is support, like that described in Joint
Publication 1 (Reference (d)), with the CSA typically operating in a supporting-to-supported
relationship relative to the CCDRs. A CSA Director exercises the authority and bears
responsibilities like those of a supporting commander. A CCDR may modify the support
relationship to that of direct support to a subordinate unit within the CCMD. The CCDR may
also give authoritative direction regarding the CCDR’s requirements to CSAs supporting the
CCDR’s military operations.

        (1) Absent modifying direction from the Secretary of Defense, the CCDR exercises
control over the performance of duties of the CSA elements supporting operations, to include
tactical control for force protection over all CSA elements (except DoD personnel for whom the
chiefs of U.S. diplomatic missions have security responsibilities by law or interagency
agreement) within the CCDR’s area of responsibility.

        (2) A CSA Director will retain the supporting relationship with all the CCMDs, even if
the CSA Director (or a senior military officer within the CSA) is also serving, as an additional
duty, as a commander of a joint force for a designated CCMD.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.




Change 1, 07/08/2016                         2
                                                                DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective June 27, 2013.




                                            Ashton B. Carter
                                            Deputy Secretary of Defense
Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Current CSAs
Glossary




Change 1, 07/08/2016                    3
                                                                DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES

(a) DoD Directive 3000.06, “Combat Support Agencies,” July 10, 2007 (hereby cancelled)
(b) Title 10, United States Code
(c) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Procedures for Combat Support Agency
    Review Team Assessments (CSART),” October 24, 2008 (hereby cancelled)
(d) Joint Publication 1, “Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States,” March 25, 2013
(e) DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)),” October
    24, 2014, as amended
(f) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3460.01C, “Combat Support Agency
    Review Team Assessments,” August 9, 2012
(g) DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual,” June 30, 2014,
    as amended
(h) DoD Directive 1404.10, “DoD Civilian Expeditionary Workforce,” January 23, 2009
(i) DoD Instruction 1100.22, “Policy and Procedures for Determining Workforce Mix,”
    April 12, 2010
(j) DoD Directive 1322.18, “Military Training,” January 13, 2009




Change 1, 07/08/2016                          4                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                       DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013


                                           ENCLOSURE 2

                                        RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE. In accordance with DoDD
5143.01 (Reference (e)) and in addition to those responsibilities in section 2 of this enclosure, the
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence:

    a. Establishes policies and procedures with respect to the combat support functions
performed by those defense intelligence agencies designated as CSAs in support of the CJCS
requirements mandated in section 193 of Reference (b).

    b. In consultation with the Director of National Intelligence, develops and implements
policies and programs to correct deficiencies identified by the CJCS and other DoD officials for
those defense intelligence agencies designated as CSAs to accomplish assigned mission support
of military combat operations.

   c. After consultation with the Director of National Intelligence, establishes policies and
procedures for reporting readiness not addressed by the Defense Readiness Reporting System
(DRRS) due to security issues for the National Security Agency/Central Security Service and the
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency.


2. OSD COMPONENT HEADS. The OSD Component heads exercise authority, direction, and
control over Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities as designated by the Secretary of
Defense and are accountable to the Secretary of Defense for the mission performance of such
agencies and activities. This includes accountability for each CSA in the CSA’s preparation for,
and execution of, combat support missions in support of operational forces. OSD Component
heads:

    a. Ensure the CSA possesses the requisite capability necessary to meet the warfighting needs
of the CCDRs and is prepared, trained, and resourced to execute, on a priority basis, the agency’s
combat support mission. Ensure the CSA Directors correct readiness shortfalls identified by the
CJCS and the CCDRs, consistent with section 193 of Reference (b).

    b. Consult with the CJCS with regard to CSA joint warfighting requirements, programming
levels, priorities, capabilities, joint training exercise participation, readiness reporting, and their
overall readiness to perform current and future CSA missions.

    c. Consult with the CJCS and recommend to the Secretary of Defense priorities for CSA
support when overall requirements in support of military operations exceed a CSA’s capability to
provide adequate support. Recommend to the Secretary of Defense additional departmental
assets to mitigate the shortfalls and make arrangements for their use, as appropriate.




Change 1, 07/08/2016                               5                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013


  d. In coordination with the CJCS, serve as the Secretary of Defense’s representative to non-
DoD elements in any negotiations concerning readiness shortfalls and possible remedial steps.

    e. Support the biennial CSA Review Team (CSART) assessments, in accordance with CJCS
Instruction 3460.01C (Reference (f)), and:

        (1) Within 5 business days of the completion and delivery of the CSART assessment,
submit a memorandum to the Deputy Secretary of Defense, with a copy provided to the CJCS,
either concurring with the assessment or outlining specific non-concurrences with the assessment
and its recommendations.

       (2) Upon direction from the Deputy Secretary of Defense, provide the Deputy Secretary
of Defense, CJCS, and the affected DoD Components with a plan of action and milestones to
implement the assessment’s recommendations. The CJCS and Deputy Chief Management
Officer will monitor implementation.

        (3) Review and implement the recommendations, including verifying that the CJCS
recommendations are consistent with strategic guidance, propose offsets, and provide
programming guidance to the Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation, for the CSA
or affected component to address the recommendations in its Program Objective Memorandum
submission.

   f. Provide for the participation of subordinate CSAs in the Secretary of Defense Biennial
Review of the Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities as administered by the Deputy Chief
Management Officer of the Department of Defense.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments consult with the CJCS on matters pertaining to CSAs, as prescribed in section 193
of Reference (b).


4. CJCS. The CJCS:

   a. Oversees the planning and execution of each CSA’s combat support mission, and:

       (1) Submits a report, in accordance with the procedures in Volume 1 of DoD Manual
8910.01 (Reference (g)), to the Secretary of Defense at least every 2 years on the responsiveness
and readiness of each CSA.

       (2) Provides for the participation of each CSA in joint training events and exercises.
Assesses the CSA’s performance in such activities, and takes steps to provide for changes to
improve the CSA’s performance.

       (3) Develops and maintains a uniform readiness reporting system for each CSA in
consultation with that CSA Director.



Change 1, 07/08/2016                            6                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013



    b. Provides military advice and planning guidance to the CSAs and the CCDRs in the
preparation of their operational plans, and provides for full participation by the CSAs in the joint
lessons learned and operational after-action review processes.

    c. Provides military advice on the allocation of a CSA’s capabilities across CCMDs to the
Secretary of Defense and the CSA Director, should the overall requirements in support of
military operations exceed its capacity.

    d. Advises the Secretary of Defense on the extent to which program recommendations and
budget proposals of the CSAs for a fiscal year conform to the priorities established in strategic
plans and the priorities established for the requirements of the Military Departments and
CCMDs. Submits to the Secretary of Defense, when necessary, alternative CSA program
recommendations and budget proposals to achieve greater conformity with the priorities
established in strategic plans and the priorities for the requirements of the CCDRs.

   e. Conducts the biennial CSART assessments, in accordance with Reference (f), and will:

       (1) Ensure the CSART assessments inform the development of strategic guidance, to
include the Quadrennial Defense Review, Guidance for the Employment of the Force, and
Guidance for the Development of the Force.

        (2) Notify the OSD Component head 60 days prior to initiating the CSART assessment
of the pending assessment and provide him or her with a copy of the previous cycle assessment
and progress review.


5. CCDRs. CCDRs:

    a. Ensure that CCMD and subordinate command plans adequately specify CSA missions and
tasks, and establish appropriate relationships for the CSAs supporting operations within their
area of responsibility or over which they exercise tactical control for force protection. Each
CCDR will provide planning and operational guidance to the CSAs and ensure that requirements
for CSA support are adequately identified in requests for capabilities.

    b. Provide the Secretary of Defense, through the CJCS, the operational impact and risk
assessment of any CSA capability shortfalls, should mission requirements exceed a CSA’s
ability to provide needed support in the absence of acceptable and readily available alternative
solutions.

    c. Provide for the participation of CSAs in CCMD joint training events and exercises; assess
the performance of agency command-linked tasks; and provide feedback to the CSA Director
through joint after-action reports.




Change 1, 07/08/2016                             7                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013


    d. Assess the relationship between the CCMD and the supporting CSAs while planning for
military operations and request from the Secretary of Defense, through the CJCS, any
modification required to carry out assigned missions.


6. CSA DIRECTORS. Under the authority, direction, and control of their respective OSD
Component head as designated in section 4 of Enclosure 3, the CSA Directors:

    a. Exercise the authority and fulfill the responsibilities and functions of a supporting agency
to CCDRs planning or executing military operations, consistent with the CSA’s established
functions and responsibilities. Establish liaisons with the CCDR concerned to facilitate
integration with CCMD planning and execution, as required, relative to the CSA’s combat
support mission.

   b. Prepare for and execute the CSA’s combat support mission and fully participate in the
development and review of operational plans through participation in the planning processes led
by CCDRs, the CJCS, and OSD. Prepare and maintain internal operational plans to ensure the
preparation for and execution of the agency’s combat support mission and, when tasked by a
supported commander, prepare such supporting plans, as necessary.

    c. Deploy agency capability, including personnel and equipment, into a CCDR’s area of
responsibility in response to validated CCMD requests for support and deployment authorization
by the Secretary of Defense.

        (1) Establish and resource sufficient emergency essential positions, in accordance with
DoDD 1404.10 (Reference (h)), to support the requirements for agency personnel to deploy into
a theater of operations and ensure that these personnel are properly trained and prepared.

        (2) When utilizing contractors to support or execute their combat support mission, ensure
that these contracts and contractors meet the requirements of DoDI 1100.22 (Reference (i)) and
that these personnel:

           (a) Are properly prepared to deploy into a theater of operations.

           (b) Are properly trained and prepared to meet the mission and theater requirements.

        (3) Establish, within the agency’s deployed elements, a command and control structure
that facilitates mission accomplishment while conforming to the operational direction of the
supported commander.

    d. Plan, program, and budget sufficient resources to ensure the agency possesses the
capability and is ready to execute its combat support mission. Provide the agency program
recommendations and budget proposals for review, through the responsible OSD Component
head, to the CJCS.




Change 1, 07/08/2016                             8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013


   e. Participate fully in the DRRS, the Chairman’s Readiness System (CRS), and other
operational and risk assessments.

    f. Establish and conduct military and joint training programs to assure the capability to
execute respective combat support missions. In accordance with DoDD 1322.18 (Reference (j)),
CSAs will participate fully in the Joint Training System and take part in joint training events and
joint exercises sponsored by the CJCS and the CCDRs.

    g. Participate fully in the JCIDS processes to define and validate future combat support
capability needs with the Joint Requirements Oversight Council (JROC). Take action under the
JCIDS to meet unprogrammed combat support needs. Upon the request of the JROC, accept
sponsorship of joint capabilities that fall within the scope of the agency’s established
responsibilities and functions.

   h. Inform the supervising OSD Component head, the CJCS, and the appropriate CCDRs
immediately in writing of any capability shortfall, its impact on the agency’s ability to provide
required combat support for operating forces, and recommendations to resolve or mitigate the
shortfall.

    i. Inform the CJCS of the agency’s inability to execute all or part of a specified combat
support mission and of any significant change in the CSA’s readiness posture, in part through
participation in the DRRS and the CRS.

    j. Participate in the Secretary of Defense Biennial Review of the Defense Agencies and DoD
Field Activities as administered by the Deputy Chief Management Officer of the Department of
Defense.




Change 1, 07/08/2016                             9                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013


                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                                       CURRENT CSAs


1. The following agencies are designated as CSAs by section 193(f) of Reference (b):

   a. Defense Information Systems Agency.

   b. Defense Intelligence Agency.

   c. Defense Logistics Agency.

   d. National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency.

2. The following agencies are designated as CSAs by the Secretary of Defense, pursuant to the
Secretary’s authority in section 193(f) of Reference (b):

   a. Defense Contract Management Agency.

   b. Defense Health Agency.

   c. Defense Threat Reduction Agency.

3. The National Security Agency/Central Security Service is designated a CSA, consistent with
section 193(d) of Reference (b), with respect to those combat support activities it performs for
the DoD.

4. In accordance with section 192 of Reference (b) and as designated by the Secretary of
Defense in the applicable DoD directives, the following OSD Component heads exercise
authority, direction, control, and supervision over the CSAs indicated:

   a. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics is the OSD
Component head for the Defense Logistics Agency, the Defense Contract Management Agency,
and the Defense Threat Reduction Agency.

   b. The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence is the OSD Component head for the
Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, and the National
Security Agency/Central Security Service.

    c. The DoD Chief Information Officer is the OSD Component head for the Defense
Information Systems Agency.




Change 1, 07/08/2016                           10                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDD 3000.06, June 27, 2013


                                      GLOSSARY


                        ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

CCDR                   Combatant Commander
CCMD                   Combatant Command
CJCS                   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
CRS                    Chairman’s Readiness System
CSA                    combat support agency
CSART                  Combat Support Agency Review Team

DoDD                   DoD Directive
DoDI                   DoD Instruction
DRRS                   Defense Readiness Reporting System

JCIDS                  Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System
JROC                   Joint Requirements Oversight Council




Change 1, 07/08/2016                       11                                  GLOSSARY
