                             Department of Defense
                                  DIRECTIVE

                                                                    NUMBER 4275.5
                                                                       March 15, 2005
                                               Incorporating Change 1, August 31, 2018

                                                                             USD(A&S)

SUBJECT: Acquisition and Management of Industrial Resources

References: (a) DoD Directive 4275.5, subject as above, October 6, 1980 (hereby
                canceled)
            (b) DoD Instruction 5000.64 “Defense Property Accountability,” August 13,
                2002
            (c) DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management
                Regulation,” current edition
            (d) DoD Directive 4270.36 “DoD Emergency, Contingency, and Other
                Unprogrammed Construction Projects,” May 17, 1997
            (e) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the
                 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering
                 and the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and
                 Sustainment,” July 13, 2018


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive:

   1.1. Reissues reference (a) to update uniform policy governing the acquisition and
management of facilities, special tooling, and special test equipment, whether these
industrial resources are acquired by and used solely within the Department of Defense or
operated and used by a contractor.

   1.2. Updates assigned responsibilities for reviewing the use, maintenance, expansion,
modernization, replacement, and disposal of industrial resources, with their related
programming, budgeting, and financing guidance.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

This Directive applies to:
                                                                      DoDD 4275.5, March 15, 2005



    2.1. The Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

    2.2. The acquisition, modernization, expansion, construction, and use of both
severable and nonseverable property for increasing or improving both production and
research and development capabilities.

   2.3. The retention, maintenance, and modernization of DoD-owned plant equipment
needed for the production capacity to support the combat readiness of the U.S. Armed
Forces.

   2.4. This Directive does not cover the establishment of new Government-owned,
Government-operated (GOGO) capabilities or facilities nor the operation of GOGOs.


3. DEFINITIONS

The terms used in this Directive are defined in enclosure 1.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy to:

   4.1. Minimize Government ownership of facilities in consonance with the need to
ensure economical support of essential peacetime, surge, and mobilization requirements.

    4.2. Maintain a base of Government-owned facilities for those industries determined
essential to defense production, when private investment is inadequate or unavailable.

   4.3. As required bylaw, notify the Congress of all Government construction to be
accomplished under the authorities of this Directive.

    4.4. Maintain accountability of Government property in accordance with DoD
Instruction 5000.64 (reference (b)).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

   5.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition. Technology, and Logistics
(USD(AT&L)) shall:




Change 1, 08/31/2018                            2
                                                                       DoDD 4275.5, March 15, 2005



        5.1.1. Develop and supervise procedures for implementing the policies established
in section 4.

       5.1.2. Review, during the budget cycle and in coordination with the Under
Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) proposals for facility projects involving new funds
during the current year to acquire, expand, or replace facilities.

        5.1.3. Approve, in coordination with appropriate OSD officials, facilities Projects
greater than $10 million.

        5.1.4. As required bylaw, notify the Congress of all construction efforts using
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Procurement, or Operation and
Maintenance funds (see DoD 7000. 14-R (reference (c)) and DoD Directive 4270.36
(reference (d))).

       5.1.5. Provide information to the Joint Programming Guidance for industrial
preparedness planning and investments for surge and mobilization requirements.

  5.2. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Heads of the DoD
Components shall:

        5.2.1. Conduct comprehensive reviews of requests for facility expansions,
examine alternatives for DoD modernization and rehabilitation funding, measure requests
against realistic requirements, examine all facilities held for surge and mobilization, and
give full consideration to technological changes and multishift production.

         5.2.2. Analyze and review proposed projects, using the criteria in establishing the
facility requirement policy in section 4. Approve facility projects less than $10 million
prior to programming and budgeting, at a level no lower than the Deputy Assistant
Secretary or the Head of the Component level. If such projects involve the use of military
construction funds, they shall be in compliance with reference (c).

       5.2.3. Maintain records to provide information that may be required by the
USD(AT&L) and the other DoD Components in the exercise of their responsibilities
under this Directive.


        5.2.4. Conduct centralized, uniform review and control of facility projects and
industrial equipment replacement projects, and for identification of plant equipment
required in connection with and related to industrial facility projects. The DoD
Components must thoroughly screen idle inventory and use any suitable real property or
equipment that is available before authorizing procurement for expansion, modernization,
or replacement.

       5.2.5. Conduct continuous surveillance over the current use and future
requirements for



Change 1, 08/31/2018                             3
                                                                     DoDD 4275.5, March 15, 2005



all Government-owned industrial real property and plant equipment to ensure proper and
timely disposal arrangement for excess facilities and facilities for which continued
Government ownership is no longer necessary.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This change reassigns the office of primary
responsibility for this Directive to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and
Sustainment in accordance with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense
Memorandum (reference (e)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosures — 1
 E1. Definitions




Change 1, 08/31/2018                            4
                                                                       DoDD 4275.5, March 15, 2005



                                    El. ENCLOSURE 1

                                      DEFINITIONS

El.1.1. Construction. The erection, installation, or assembly of buildings or structures; the
addition, expansion, extension, alteration, conversion, or replacement of existing
buildings or structures. It includes equipment and utilities installed and made a part of the
real property (excludes installation and relocation of severable property and minor
modifications necessitated by the installation or relocation of such severable property)
and related site preparation, excavation, and other land improvements.

El.1.2. Expansion. The addition of personal or real property that creates a new industrial
plant or augments the capability or capacity of an existing plant.

El.1.3. Facilities. Includes the permanent, semi-permanent, or temporary real property
assets required to operate and support the materiel system, including conducting studies
to define types of facilities or facility improvements, locations, space needs, utilities,
environmental requirements, real estate requirements, and equipment.

El.1.4. Industrial Preparedness. The state of preparedness of industry to produce essential
materiel to support the national military objectives.

El.1.5. Mobilization. The act of preparing for war or other emergencies through
assembling and organizing national resources; the process by which the U.S. Armed
Forces or part of them are brought to a state of readiness for war or other national
emergency. This includes assembling and organizing personnel, supplies, and material
for active military service.

E1.1.6. Modernization and Replacement. The replacement of one or more existing items
of equipment to achieve economic or industrial preparedness advantages to the
Department of Defense through increased efficiency. Items that are Government-
furnished may be replaced either by new procurement or by equipment from idle
inventories. Replacement action must be supported by an analysis of cost savings or
industrial preparedness benefits to be realized.

El.1.7. Nonseverable Property. Property that cannot be removed after erection or
installation without substantial loss of value or damage to the property or to the premises.

El.1.8. Plant Equipment (PE). Personal property of a capital nature (consisting of
equipment, machine tools, test equipment, furniture, vehicles, accessory and auxiliary
items, but excluding special tooling and special test equipment) used or capable of use in
the manufacture of supplies, in the performance of services, or for any administrative or
general plant purposes.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                             5                          ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                        DoDD 4275.5, March 15, 2005




El.1.9. Project. A planned undertaking of something to be accomplished, acquired,
produced, or constructed, having a finite beginning and a finite ending, such as a
construction project or a research and development project.

El.l.10. Special Test Equipment (STE). Either single or multipurpose integrated test units
engineered, designed, fabricated, or modified to accomplish special purpose testing in
performing a contract. It consists of items or assemblies of equipment including standard
or general-purpose items or components that are interconnected and interdependent so as
to become a new functional entity for special testing purposes. STE does not include
material, special tooling, real property (except foundations and similar improvements
necessary for installing special test equipment), and equipment items used for general
testing purposes, or property that with relatively minor expense can be made suitable for
general-purpose use.

El.1.11. Special Tooling. All jigs, dies, fixtures, molds, patterns, taps, gauges, all
components of these items, and replacement of these items, which are of such a
specialized nature that without substantial modification or alteration their use is limited to
the development or production of particular supplies or parts thereof or to the
performance of particular services. It does not include material, special test equipment,
real property or plant equipment (except foundations and similar improvements necessary
for installing special tooling), machine tools, or similar capital items.

El.1.12. Surge. An increase in the production or repair of defense goods for a limited
duration of time.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                              6                          ENCLOSURE 1
