                               DOD INSTRUCTION 5530.03
                           INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS

Originating Component:         Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense

Effective:                     December 4, 2019
Change 1 Effective:            January 17, 2025

Releasability:                 Cleared for public release. Available on the DoD Issuances Website at
                               https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Reissues and Cancels:          DoD Directive 5530.03, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987, as
                               amended

Approved by:                   David Norquist, Deputy Secretary of Defense
Change 1 Approved by:          Kathleen H. Hicks, Deputy Secretary of Defense


Purpose: This issuance:
• Delegates the authorities of the Secretary of Defense to approve, negotiate, and conclude
international agreements.
•   Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for:
    o Compliance with Section 112b of Title 1, United States Code (U.S.C.), also known and referred
to in this issuance as the “Case Act.”
    o Delegating authorities for specific categories of international agreements.
•   Prescribes guidance for:
    o Obtaining authorizations, including Department of State (DOS) authorization and internal DoD
authorization, required to negotiate and conclude international agreements with foreign governments or
agencies thereof and international organizations by DoD personnel and DoD Components, commands,
and other organizational elements.
    o Initiating, negotiating, concluding, and reporting international agreements.
    o Resolving OSD and DoD Component concerns with implementation of and compliance with
international agreements.
    o Maintaining central repositories for international agreements in DoD.
                                                                                              DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                                                  Change 1, January 17, 2025

                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Policy. ............................................................................................................................... 3
   1.3. Summary of Change 1. ..................................................................................................... 3
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES ......................................................................................................... 4
   2.1. Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P))............................................................. 4
   2.2. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment (USD(A&S))................... 4
   2.3. USD(P) and USD(A&S). .................................................................................................. 4
   2.4. GC DoD. ........................................................................................................................... 5
   2.5. Relevant DoD Component Heads. .................................................................................... 5
SECTION 3: DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY TO NEGOTIATE AND CONCLUDE INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENTS ................................................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 4: EXERCISING THE AUTHORITY TO APPROVE THE NEGOTIATION AND CONCLUSION OF
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS ...................................................................................................... 11
SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS ................................ 13
   5.1. Requirements for, and Restrictions on, Authority to Negotiate or Conclude International
       Agreements. ...................................................................................................................... 13
   5.2. Procedures for Requesting Authorization to Negotiate or Conclude an International
       Agreement. ........................................................................................................................ 19
SECTION 6: CENTRAL REPOSITORY ............................................................................................... 22
SECTION 7: CASE ACT IMPLEMENTATION ..................................................................................... 24
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 26
   G.1. Acronyms. ...................................................................................................................... 26
   G.2. Definitions. ..................................................................................................................... 26
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 30

FIGURES
Figure 1. Background Statement for Submission of International Agreements .......................... 15
Figure 2. DDL Format ................................................................................................................. 20




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                                DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                    Change 1, January 17, 2025

               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY. This issuance applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within DoD (referred to collectively in this issuance as the “DoD
Components”).

    b. All international agreements concerning matters within the functional responsibilities of
all DoD Components.

   c. All non-binding subsidiary instruments that invoke the provisions of an umbrella or
chapeau agreement, or for which an umbrella or chapeau agreement is invoked in another
document.


1.2. POLICY. It is DoD policy to comply with all U.S. laws, regulations, policies, and
procedures regarding the negotiation and conclusion of international agreements, and to maintain
awareness of, and comply with, the terms of applicable international agreements.


1.3. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance implement the Case Act, as
amended by Section 5947 of Public Law 117-263, and updates references and organizational
titles.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                            3
                                                                DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                    Change 1, January 17, 2025

                           SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). In addition to the
responsibilities in Paragraphs 2.3. and 2.5., and subject to appropriate DoD legal authority or
specific DOS authorization (see Paragraphs 3.2. and 5.1.c.), the USD(P) may authorize the
negotiation and conclusion of all international agreements relating to the responsibilities and
functions of the USD(P) established in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5111.01.


2.2. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION AND SUSTAINMENT
(USD(A&S)). In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraphs 2.3. and 2.5., and subject to
appropriate DoD legal authority or specific DOS authorization (see Paragraphs 3.2. and 5.1.c.),
the USD(A&S) may authorize the negotiation and conclusion of all international agreements
relating to the responsibilities and functions of the USD(A&S) established in DoDD 5135.02 and
the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum.


2.3. USD(P) AND USD(A&S). The USD(P) and the USD(A&S):

    a. Coordinate regularly to ensure consistency of policy and practice within DoD regarding
the negotiation and conclusion of international agreements.

    b. With respect to international agreements under their respective responsibilities, as
specified in Paragraph 5.1.d., and subject to DoD legal authority or specific DOS authorization
as listed in Paragraphs 3.2. and 5.1.c.:

        (1) May delegate their respective authorities to authorize or approve negotiation and
conclusion of international agreements to the DoD Component heads, or to the office or activity
within the DoD Component that has cognizance over the applicable international agreement.
The USD(P) and USD(A&S) may grant the authority to redelegate such authority if desired, and
may rescind or change any delegations they make. Section 3 of this issuance delineates such
delegations of authority. All further delegations must be in writing, and a copy of such
delegations must be filed with the General Counsel of the Department of Defense (GC DoD).

       (2) Authorize the negotiation and conclusion of international agreements.

       (3) Arrange for DoD participation in the negotiations of international agreements,
including representation, advice, or assistance by other DoD Components, when appropriate.

       (4) Monitor the implementation of agreements in force, and provide appropriate
guidance, advice, and assistance to other DoD Components in exercising their responsibilities
under such international agreements.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       4
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025
2.4. GC DOD. The GC DoD:

     a. Acts as lead counsel for DoD in all international negotiations conducted by OSD before
initiation of negotiations, for the tender of proposed international agreements to prospective
parties or participants for the negotiation of international agreements, and for the conclusion of
international agreements, in accordance with DoDD 5145.01.

    b. Coordinates with DoD Components that are authorized to negotiate and conclude
international agreements throughout the negotiation process.

    c. Provides assistance, upon request, to DoD Components’ General Counsel or Staff Judge
Advocate (SJA), or the Legal Counsel to the CJCS, when authority to negotiate an international
agreement has been delegated to officials of that DoD Component.

   d. Establishes and distributes policies and guidance, as needed, to implement this issuance.

   e. Serves as the DoD’s Chief International Agreements Officer.


2.5. RELEVANT DOD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads who are
delegated authority to negotiate and conclude international agreements, or the offices or
activities within the applicable DoD Components with cognizance over a particular type of
international agreement that has been delegated with that authority:

    a. Oversee implementation of and compliance with international agreements for which the
respective DoD Component heads have responsibility.

    b. Inform the GC DoD of implementation of, compliance with, amendments to, and
termination of all international agreements in force for which they have responsibility annually.

       (1) If a question arises concerning whether any DoD Component is complying with the
terms of an international agreement, and the question cannot be resolved by informal discussions
between the responsible offices, then the responsible offices will provide the responsible DoD
Component with cognizance over the particular type of international agreement with the details
relevant to resolving such question.

        (2) If a question arises concerning whether there is DoD legal authority or specific DOS
authorization as appropriate, whether any document or set of documents constitutes an
international agreement, or whether an international agreement has policy significance as
specified in Paragraph 5.1.d., then before proceeding, the DoD Component with cognizance over
the particular type of international agreement must first submit that question for decision through
the GC DoD and either the USD(P) or the USD(A&S), as applicable, or their respective
designees, to resolve such question.

    c. Develop, distribute, and maintain respective DoD Component guidance to implement this
issuance and designate a single office of record for handling international agreements.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                          5
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025
       (1) Accept and coordinate requests originating within that DoD Component for
authorization under Section 5 to negotiate or conclude an international agreement.

     (2) Record coordination actions taken on a request originating from another DoD
Component.

        (3) Record the final determination when the USD(P) or the USD(A&S), or their
respective designees, as applicable, approves or denies a DoD Component request to negotiate or
conclude an international agreement.

        (4) Ensure that a complete file of the negotiation history is compiled and retained for
10 years or until the agreement expires by its terms or is terminated, whichever is later. A
complete file must be maintained in retrievable form within the DoD Component for each
international agreement that the DoD Component has primary negotiating responsibility for
within DoD. This requirement applies even if the chief U.S. negotiator or the signer of the
agreement is an official of another DoD Component or another Federal department or agency.

       (5) Monitor compliance within that DoD Component with the provisions of this
issuance.

        (6) Maintain an index of all international agreements negotiated by, or within the
responsibility of, the DoD Component concerned. A copy of the index, updated to include all
international agreements concluded during the previous calendar year, must be sent to the GC
DoD by March 31, of each year.

         (7) Forward the signed or initialed original texts constituting the international agreement,
together with all accompanying papers, including any annex, appendix, codicil, side agreement,
agreed minutes, exchanges of notes, side letter, or any document of similar purpose or function
that is entered into contemporaneously and in conjunction with the agreement, directly to the
Assistant Legal Adviser for Treaty Affairs, DOS; and forward a copy to the GC DoD, as soon as
possible, to arrive at these offices not later than 15 calendar days after the date the international
agreement is signed or otherwise concluded in accordance with Sections 6 and 7.

    d. Provide notice to the USD(P) or USD(A&S), as appropriate, with a copy to the GC DoD,
if an approval authority delegated in Section 3 is redelegated.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        6
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025

    SECTION 3: DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY TO NEGOTIATE AND CONCLUDE
                      INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS

3.1. Subject to DOS substantive authorization (see Paragraphs 3.2. and 5.1.c.), as appropriate,
and Paragraph 5.1.d., the authority to negotiate and conclude international agreements, within the
categories specified in this section, is hereby delegated to the DoD Component heads, as
designated in this section. Notwithstanding any delegations of authority, DoD Component heads
must comply with all applicable requirements in this issuance, and must consult with the GC
DoD, through the respective DoD Component’s General Counsel or SJA, and through the Office
of the Legal Counsel to the CJCS, when applicable, regarding any international agreement that
may raise significant legal issues.


3.2. These delegations do not confer substantive DoD legal authority or specific DOS
authorization as defined in Paragraphs 181.2.(b) and 181.4. of the Case Act, Part 181 of Title 22,
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), to enter into a particular international agreement for which
there is no separate legal authority. In accordance with Subchapter 720 of Volume 11 of the
DOS Foreign Affairs Manual, also known and referred to in this issuance as “Circular-175,”
specific DOS authorization is required in the case of any international agreement that is binding
under international law. Subject to substantive DoD legal authority and specific DOS
authorization by Circular-175, the authority to negotiate and conclude the following categories of
international agreements is delegated as follows:

    a. Authority for technical, operational, working, status of forces, or defense cooperation
agreements, or similar international agreements, and authority for technical, operational,
working, or similar implementing agreements concluded pursuant to a treaty or executive
agreement is delegated to:

        (1) The DoD Component head with primary responsibility for the subject matter of the
international agreement, in coordination with the relevant Combatant Commander, as
appropriate.

        (2) The relevant Combatant Commander, through the CJCS, for international agreements
concerning the joint operations of U.S. forces and combined operations of U.S. and foreign
forces.

    b. Authority for international agreements for cooperative or reciprocal operational, logistic,
training, or other military support, including arrangements for shared use or licensing of military
equipment, facilities, services, and non-physical resources, is delegated to:

        (1) The DoD Component head with primary responsibility for the subject matter of the
international agreement, in coordination with the relevant Combatant Commander, as
appropriate.




SECTION 3: DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY TO NEGOTIATE AND CONCLUDE INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENTS                                                                                        7
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025
        (2) The Director, Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA), for international
agreements relating to the provision of defense articles, military training, and other defense-
related services by grant, loan, cash sale, or lease, pursuant to the Security Assistance Program.

        (3) The relevant Combatant Commander, through the CJCS, for international agreements
concerning the joint operations of U.S. forces and combined operations of U.S. and foreign
forces.

       (4) The Director, International Cooperation (IC) in the Office of the USD(A&S), through
the USD(A&S), for international agreements concerning cooperative or reciprocal logistic
support, including shared use of equipment, facilities, and services.

       (5) The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, through the Under Secretary
of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, for international agreements pertaining to health and
medical matters, including those related to the provision of medical care to foreign military and
diplomatic personnel, as may be authorized pursuant to Section 2559 of Title 10, U.S.C.

    c. Authority for international agreements relating to combined military planning, combined
command relationships, combined military exercises and operations, humanitarian operations,
peacekeeping operations, contingency operations, and minor and emergency force deployments
is delegated to the relevant Combatant Commander, through the CJCS, in coordination with the
Director, DSCA.

     d. Authority for international agreements relating to personnel assignments, exchange, and
liaison programs is delegated to the DoD Component head who assigns U.S. forces personnel or
accepts foreign personnel or liaison officers, in coordination with the relevant Combatant
Commander, and the Director, DSCA, as appropriate. This does not apply to agreements that are
implemented under the authorities delegated to the Director, IC, in Paragraph 3.2.i.

    e. Authority for international agreements for the collection or exchange of military
intelligence information, less signals and geospatial intelligence, is delegated to the Director,
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIR DIA). International agreements pertaining to signals
intelligence are delegated to the Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security
Service (DIRNSA/CHCSS). International agreements pertaining to geospatial intelligence are
delegated to the Director, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA). The Under Secretary
of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) must coordinate on all proposed
international agreements concerning intelligence and intelligence-related matters.

    f. Authority for international agreements for the collection or exchange of military
information and data other than military intelligence, as defined in DoDD 5230.11 and National
Disclosure Policy (NDP)-1, is delegated to:

       (1) The DoD Component heads.

        (2) The relevant Combatant Commander, through the CJCS, for agreements concerning
the joint operations of U.S. forces and the combined operations of U.S. and foreign forces.



SECTION 3: DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY TO NEGOTIATE AND CONCLUDE INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENTS                                                                                           8
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025
      (3) The Director, NGA, with USD(I&S) and USD(P) concurrence, for international
agreements relating to mapping, charting, geodesy, and gravity data.

    g. Authority for international agreements relating to communications security or cyber
security technology, services, support, research, equipment development and production,
including commercial communication product security, mutual recognition of evaluation test
activities, and collaborative development of evaluation test specifications, is delegated to the
DIRNSA/CHCSS. The USD(I&S) and DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO) must
coordinate on all such proposed international agreements.

    h. Authority for international agreements relating to military-related signals intelligence is
delegated to the DIRNSA/CHCSS. The USD(I&S) must coordinate on all such proposed
international agreements.

   i. Authority for international agreements relating to cooperative research, development, test,
evaluation, production, follow-on support, information exchange, and related personnel
exchange and standardization agreements is delegated to the Director, IC, Office of the
USD(A&S), through the USD(A&S), for such matters including, but not limited to, the
exchanges of engineers and scientists under the Engineer and Scientist Exchange Program.

    j. Authority for international agreements relating to the sharing or exchange of DoD
communications equipment, facilities, support, services, or other communications resources with
a foreign country or alliance organization, such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), including international agreements pursuant to Section 2350f of Title 10, U.S.C.; the
use of U.S. military frequencies or frequency bands; communications interoperability or security;
and the use of U.S. communications facilities and systems by foreign organizations, whether
overseas or in the continental United States, is delegated to:

        (1) The DoD Component head with primary responsibility for the subject matter of the
international agreement, in coordination with the relevant Combatant Commander, as
appropriate.

        (2) The relevant Combatant Commander, through the CJCS, for international agreements
relating to the joint operations of U.S. forces and combined operations of U.S. and foreign
forces.

       (3) The DoD CIO for all other related matters.

   k. Authority for international agreements relating to command, control, and
communications, and information technology policies, standards, and programs, pursuant to
DoDD 5144.02, is delegated to the DoD CIO.

    l. Authority for international agreements relating to cooperation in cybersecurity and
defensive cyberspace operations is delegated to the DoD CIO.

    m. Authority for international agreements relating to on-base financial institutions (e.g.,
military banking facilities and credit unions) is delegated to the Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO).

SECTION 3: DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY TO NEGOTIATE AND CONCLUDE INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENTS                                                                                           9
                                                                   DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                       Change 1, January 17, 2025
    n. Authority for international agreements relating to military and industrial security
agreements, in accordance with the provisions of DoDD 5230.11, is delegated to the USD(P) or
their designee.

    o. Authority for international agreements relating to water resources development is
delegated to the DoD Component head with primary responsibility for the subject matter of the
agreement, in coordination with the USD(P) and the relevant Combatant Commander.

   p. Authority for international agreements pertaining to safeguarding classified information
and material is delegated to the Director, Defense Technology Security Administration, in
accordance with the provisions of DoDD 5105.72.

    q. Authority for international agreements relating to the use of test facilities for the testing of
defense-related materiel, and agreements for the reciprocal use of test facilities is delegated to
the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation.


3.3. No authority may be redelegated without the prior written consent of the delegating
authority in Paragraph 3.2. Redelegations of authority may be given for categories of
international agreements, rather than on a case-by-case basis. Requests by a delegating authority
to redelegate the authority to negotiate and conclude international agreements that have policy
significance as specified in Paragraph 5.1.d. will be coordinated with the USD(P) or the
USD(A&S), or their respective designees, as applicable. In the request for authority to delegate,
the original delegating authority will address and resolve any questions or conflicts pertaining to
any further delegations of authority. The original delegating authority may impose limitations on
subsequent delegations, may rescind or change any delegation made, and may also limit
subsequent redelegations.




SECTION 3: DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY TO NEGOTIATE AND CONCLUDE INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENTS                                                                                          10
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025

    SECTION 4: EXERCISING THE AUTHORITY TO APPROVE THE
 NEGOTIATION AND CONCLUSION OF INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS

4.1. Subject to Paragraph 5.1.d., exercising the authority to approve the negotiation and
conclusion of international agreements, including the procedures described in this section and
Section 5, will be accomplished in accordance with DoD Component guidance implementing
this issuance. The procedures in this section will be used by DoD officials in exercising their
authority to grant or deny requests for authority to negotiate and conclude international
agreements.


4.2. Authority to approve the negotiation and conclusion of international agreements will be
exercised in full consultation with all other DoD Components that may have an interest in the
objective of the proposed international agreement. Specific procedures for exercising the
authority to approve the negotiation and conclusion of international agreements include, but are
not limited to, the following:

   a. Before negotiation of an international agreement, DoD Components that are assigned to a
Combatant Commander with a designated physical area of responsibility, or that are located
within a Combatant Commander’s designated physical area of responsibility, will:

       (1) Fully inform the appropriate Combatant Commander of any proposed negotiation
that might affect the plans and programs of such commands.

       (2) Provide the Combatant Commander with a copy of each agreement upon its
conclusion, in addition to fulfilling the reporting requirements of Sections 6 and 7.

    b. Before negotiation of an international agreement, DoD Components not assigned to or
located within the designated physical area of responsibility of a Combatant Commander will:

       (1) Inform the appropriate Combatant Commander and the Office of the CJCS of any
proposed negotiation that might affect the plans and programs of such commands.

       (2) Provide the Combatant Commander with a copy of each such agreement upon its
conclusion, in addition to fulfilling the reporting requirements of Sections 6 and 7.

    c. The international agreements discussed in Paragraphs 3.2.a. and b. that involve significant
changes in logistic support for the Military Departments, including adjustments to the use of
facilities abroad that may affect joint or combined plans and programs, will be coordinated with
the USD(P); the CJCS; Commander, United States Transportation Command; and the Combatant
Commander for the overseas area involved, or their respective designees.

    d. Before making any commitment to representatives of a foreign government or
international organization, security of information provisions contained in international
agreements involving, or likely to involve, program security instructions (PSIs) or the release of
classified military information, classified technology, or classified material, will be coordinated

SECTION 4: EXERCISING THE AUTHORITY TO APPROVE THE NEGOTIATION AND CONCLUSION OF
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                                         11
                                                               DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                   Change 1, January 17, 2025
with the USD(P), or their designee. International agreements involving, or likely to involve, the
release of classified military information will be coordinated with the USD(P), or their designee,
and the Defense Technology Security Administration. Such agreements will comply with DoDD
5230.11 and NDP-1 and will meet the conditions for release provided in those publications.

    e. International agreements that might have an effect on the development or procurement of
standardized weapon systems or equipment among NATO States will be coordinated with the
USD(A&S) and the USD(P), or their respective designees, as early in the development or
procurement stage as possible. DoD Instruction (DoDI) 2010.06 provides policy guidance on
materiel interoperability and standardization with allies and coalition partners.


4.3. Nothing in this issuance will be construed as altering such authorities as may be delegated
in other DoDDs or DoDIs to OSD or other DoD Component heads that are authorized to develop
and prescribe DoD procedures, positions, policies, and plans for carrying out their functional
responsibilities. DoD officials authorized under this issuance to conduct negotiations will ensure
that negotiations are conducted in accordance with such positions, plans, and policies.




SECTION 4: EXERCISING THE AUTHORITY TO APPROVE THE NEGOTIATION AND CONCLUSION OF
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                                         12
                                                                DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                    Change 1, January 17, 2025

     SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL
                         AGREEMENTS

5.1. REQUIREMENTS FOR, AND RESTRICTIONS ON, AUTHORITY TO
NEGOTIATE OR CONCLUDE INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS.

   a. The following requirements for, and restrictions on, authority to negotiate or conclude
apply to all international agreements.

       (1) Appropriate authorities must grant the authorization to negotiate or conclude
proposed international agreements in accordance with Section 3.

       (2) DoD Components proposing the negotiation of an international agreement must
comply with the relevant provisions of the Case Act, Part 181 of Title 22, CFR, and this
issuance.

        (3) The DoD officer or employee, other than an official authorized under this issuance to
grant approval to negotiate, who receives a proposal from a representative of a foreign
government or international organization seeking to initiate the negotiation of an international
agreement for which negotiation authority has not been granted under this issuance, must report
that fact promptly, through appropriate channels, to the office or activity within the DoD
Component concerned that has cognizance over the applicable type of international agreement.
The DoD officer or employee must obtain appropriate authorization before taking part in
negotiations. DoD personnel may accept proposed texts from foreign government
representatives but must not begin negotiations, and must inform the foreign government
representative that such proposed text must be submitted for approval to negotiate before any
negotiations may occur.

        (4) DoD personnel authorized to conduct or take part in the negotiation of an
international agreement will be responsible for ensuring that during the negotiation:

           (a) No proposal is communicated to a foreign government or to an international
organization as a U.S. Government proposal if that proposal deviates from an existing
authorization or instruction.

           (b) No proposal is agreed to beyond the existing authorization without clearance
from the original approval authority.

           (c) DoD personnel communicate to the foreign government or international
organization that any proposal that has been tentatively accepted but is beyond the existing
authorization during negotiation is not final and must be subject to final approval by the
appropriate approval authority.

       (5) DoD Component heads authorized to negotiate and conclude international
agreements will consult regularly with the GC DoD or the relevant Office of General Counsel or
SJA, and through the Office of the Legal Counsel to the CJCS, and the relevant office of the


SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                   13
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025
authorizing official, throughout the negotiation process. DoD Component GCs and SJAs are
encouraged to request assistance from the GC DoD.

        (6) The authorization to negotiate or conclude proposed substantive amendments to an
international agreement must be granted in accordance with the procedures outlined in this
issuance, including DoD legal authority or specific DOS authorization (see Paragraphs 3.2. and
5.1.c.). Substantive amendments include those provisions that, by themselves, might form the
basis of a separate agreement; that propose a new obligation not previously contemplated by the
parties; or that propose a substantive revision to an existing obligation, including any provisions
that are not authorized by DoD legal authority or specific DOS authorization. The negotiation or
conclusion of all amendments, whether substantive or not, must be approved by the same DoD
official (or their successor) who approved the original international agreement, unless such
official (or their successor) has expressly delegated such approval authority to another DoD
official.

       (7) DoD Components authorized to negotiate and conclude international agreements
must not discuss the initiation, ongoing negotiations, or conclusion of international agreements
with members of the news media without prior coordination with the applicable DoD
Component senior public affairs official.

        (8) Requests for authority to negotiate and conclude international agreements that have
policy significance, as specified in Paragraph 5.1.d., will be forwarded to the USD(P) or the
USD(A&S), as applicable, or their respective designees, for approval. In those instances when it
is unclear whether an international agreement has policy significance, then the USD(P) or
USD(A&S), as applicable, or their respective designees, will decide whether a proposed
agreement falls under Paragraph 5.1.d.

    b. No DoD Component will make any unilateral commitment to any foreign government or
international organization, whether in the form of a letter, memorandum, or oral statement,
without obtaining the concurrence of the DoD Component’s Office of General Counsel or SJA.

    c. This issuance, including the delegations of authority in Section 3, does not constitute
substantive DoD legal authority or specific DOS authorization to negotiate or conclude any
international agreement.

        (1) Substantive DoD legal authority and specific DOS authorization to negotiate and
conclude an international agreement, or to undertake responsibilities or commitments proposed
to be assumed by the United States, DoD, or other U.S. department or agency, through an
international agreement, will be subject to:

           (a) The law applicable to the subject matter in the agreement.

           (b) Appropriate DOS authorization by concurrence of, or consultation with, the DOS
pursuant to Part 181 of Title 22, CFR and, if applicable, the Circular-175 process, given the
Secretary of State’s responsibilities for the conduct of U.S. foreign relations.

      (2) Requests for Circular-175 authorization to negotiate or conclude any international
agreement must include a legal and policy memorandum that includes all relevant enclosures and


SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                      14
                                                                        DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                            Change 1, January 17, 2025
information concerning the international agreement, contained in Figure 1. The legal and policy
memorandum may be part of the same memorandum.

          Figure 1. Background Statement for Submission of International Agreements

    I.        Type of Agreement:
              bilateral ________      multilateral ________
    II.       Classification of the agreement.
    III.      Specify whether the agreement is binding or non-binding under international law.
    IV.       Specify the parties or participants (normally ministries, agencies, or departments of
              governments).
    V.        List all U.S. and foreign governmental ministries, agencies, or departments identified as
              responsible for carrying out the agreement.
    VI.       Specify the full title of the agreement.
    VII.      Specify the subject matter of the agreement.
    VIII.     Provide a statement of the legal authority under which the DoD is authorized to enter into,
              conclude, and implement the agreement.
    IX.       Provide a statement of any provisions raising particular legal issues, including any
              understanding regarding the meaning of particular provisions.
    X.        Provide a statement of provisions that significantly deviate from the template contained in
              the blanket Circular-175 authorization, if applicable.
    XI.       Identify the applicable Circular-175 authorization and attach a copy of such authorization,
              if possible.
    XII.      Provide a statement confirming that the legal analysis in the memorandum of law in the
              Circular-175 authorization applies to the proposed agreement, and a discussion of new
              legal issues raised by the request, if applicable.
    XIII.     For implementing agreements, include a copy of the agreement under which the
              implementing agreement is being concluded.
    XIV.      State the date of entry into force or entry in effect. Spell the month.
    XV.       State the date of termination, if applicable. Spell the month.
    XVI.      Print the names of each signing official, their title and the office represented, and the
              ministry, agency, or department or international organization represented.
    XVII. State the full title(s) and date(s) of agreement(s), if any, upon which this agreement is
              based or that this agreement amends.
    XVIII. State the date or dates of signature of this agreement. Spell the month.




SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                               15
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025
    d. The USD(P) or the USD(A&S), as applicable, or their respective designees, will approve
the authority for a DoD Component head, as designated in Section 3, to negotiate or conclude
each proposed international agreement under their cognizance that has policy significance before
such international agreement will be negotiated or concluded.

        (1) International agreements that have policy significance include, but are not limited to,
international agreements that:

           (a) Could significantly affect:

              1. Foreign or defense relations between the United States and another
government, including, but not limited to, agreements relating to the status of Military Service
members and DoD civilian employee personnel in foreign countries, e.g., exemptions from host
nation laws.

               2. Access to foreign territory.

              3. Access to or use of foreign government-owned land or structures on a
reimbursable or non-reimbursable basis.

              4. Construction or relinquishment of the right of use of land or structures on
foreign government-owned facilities.

              5. Bilateral defense or military-to-military associations between the United States
and another country.

           (b) Would create security commitments, assurances, or arrangements currently not
assumed by the United States in existing treaties; would create mutual security or other defense
agreements and arrangements; or would alter U.S. obligations with respect to the defense of a
foreign government or area.

           (c) Would raise unusual or uncommon legal issues or establish significant new legal
precedents, as determined by the DoD Component General Counsel or SJA, as applicable.

           (d) By their nature would require approval, negotiation, or signature at the OSD or
diplomatic level.

           (e) Have foreign disclosure policy implications pursuant to DoDDs 5230.11 and
5230.20, or involve communications interoperability or security.

           (f) Involve cooperative production of military equipment or cooperation in the
research, development, test, evaluation, or production of defense articles, services, or technology.

          (g) Concern cooperative or reciprocal logistic support, including shared use of
equipment, facilities, and services.

           (h) Have cost-sharing provisions.




SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                    16
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025
        (2) Paragraphs 5.1.d.(1)(a) through 5.1.d.(1)(h) do not represent an exhaustive
description of international agreements that have policy significance. Other identifying criteria
or categories of these agreements may be identified by the USD(P) or the USD(A&S), as
applicable, the GC DoD, or their respective designees.

    e. Notwithstanding the delegations of authority in Sections 3 and 4, no international
agreement that relies on the authority of Section 3204(a)(4) of Title 10, U.S.C., for use of other-
than-competitive contracting procedures will be negotiated or concluded without the prior
approval of the USD(A&S) or their designee.

    f. Notwithstanding Sections 3 and 4, no international agreement that involves the
expenditure of DoD funds, or has funding implications, will be negotiated or concluded without
the concurrence of the USD(C)/CFO or their designee.

    g. Notwithstanding Sections 3 and 4, no international agreement that implicates a reliance
upon DoD’s legal authorities to undertake military construction will be negotiated or concluded
without the concurrence of the USD(P), the USD(A&S), and the USD(C)/(CFO), or their
respective designees, as applicable, and the relevant Combatant Commander, through the CJCS.

    h. Notwithstanding Sections 3 and 4, no international agreement that involves payment to
any entity of a foreign government for use of or access to land or facilities, except in the case of
an international agreement for the reciprocal use of test facilities, will be negotiated or concluded
without the concurrence of the:

       (1) USD(P), USD(A&S), and USD(C)/(CFO), or their respective designees.

       (2) Relevant Combatant Commander, through the CJCS.

       (3) The office or activity within the DoD Component concerned that will be responsible
for making any such payments.

    i. Notwithstanding Sections 3 and 4, no international agreement, the implementation of
which requires the enactment of new legislative authority, will be concluded without the prior
approval of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs and the GC DoD or their
respective designees.

    j. Notwithstanding Sections 3 and 4, no international agreement that involves health affairs
or personnel and readiness matters will be concluded without prior coordination with the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the GC DoD or their respective designees.

    k. The authorization to conclude an international agreement may be requested and granted
simultaneously with the authorization to negotiate an international agreement. Alternatively, the
authorization to conclude may be withheld initially and granted later. The grant of either
authorization may be made subject to any conditions considered necessary or desirable by the
authorizing official; this may include prescribing which DoD personnel will participate in the
negotiation, and designating the delegation lead and the chief negotiator, to the extent those
decisions are within the purview of the authorizing official.



SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                     17
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025
    l. Implementing agreements, annexes, project agreements, or other subsidiary agreements
that are implemented under an umbrella or other master international agreement will be reviewed
by the GC DoD. The responsible DoD Component must include in the request for GC DoD
review a legal memorandum by that DoD Component’s Office of General Counsel or SJA. The
memorandum will provide, among other relevant matters, a detailed review of why the proposed
subsidiary agreement is within the scope of the umbrella or master agreement and may be
concluded under the terms of such agreement.

    m. With the exception of Paragraph 5.1.a.(4)(a), the restrictions and requirements of this
section do not apply to DoD personnel and employees assigned or detailed to U.S. delegations or
diplomatic missions, whether as individuals or as members of a military mission, group, or other
organization, in those situations where the chief of the U.S. delegation or diplomatic mission
receives authorization to negotiate from the Secretary of State, consistent with Part 181 of
Title 22, CFR. In such situations, DoD personnel must comply fully with applicable instructions,
including directives of the chief of the U.S. delegation or diplomatic mission.

    n. International agreements concluded by any DoD official must be in English language text
unless one of the following criteria has been met:

        (1) The international agreement expressly provides that the English language text will be
considered by the parties as the governing text in case of conflict between the different language
texts; or

         (2) The international agreement expressly provides that the English language text and the
foreign language text are equally authentic. The foreign language text of the agreement must be
made the subject of a memorandum, executed before the agreement or arrangement is concluded
in any language, stating that the foreign language text and the English language text are in
conformity with each other and that both texts have the same meaning in all substantive respects.
The certification will be dated and signed by a civilian, military, or local translator who has been
designated as qualified by the DoD official authorized to negotiate and conclude the agreement
or arrangement, or by an appropriate DOS official. The certification and the foreign language
text of the agreement must be sent with the English language text of the agreement to the
cognizant central repository identified in Section 6, and in accordance with Section 7, to DOS.

    o. Each international agreement and any of its amendments concluded by DoD officials must
include the dates and places of signature and the typed name and title of each signatory. The
month should be spelled out.

    p. Unless an international agreement has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the
procedures specified in Paragraph 5.2., the USD(P), the USD(A&S), and all other officials of
DoD Components to whom the responsibility to negotiate and conclude international agreements
has been delegated must obtain the concurrence of their DoD Component’s Office of General
Counsel or SJA before providing any draft of such agreement to a prospective party; before
approving any negotiated text; and before concluding any international agreement. That
concurrence will include a certification that the requirements of the Case Act and this issuance
have been met.




SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                    18
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025
5.2. PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING AUTHORIZATION TO NEGOTIATE OR
CONCLUDE AN INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT.

    a. The procedures in this section will be used by the USD(P), the USD(A&S), and all other
OSD officials to whom responsibility for granting or denying requests for authorization to
negotiate or conclude international agreements has been delegated by this issuance or by the
USD(P) or the USD(A&S), when considering a request for authorization to negotiate or conclude
an international agreement. For international agreements under the authority of the USD(A&S),
streamlined agreement procedures, including the use of a summary statement of intent, as
authorized in DoDI 5000.02 and as described in the Defense Acquisition Guidebook, may be
used in lieu of the procedures in this section.

    b. The office or activity within the DoD Component concerned will request the authority to
negotiate or conclude an international agreement in the Component’s area of interest from the
USD(P), the USD(A&S), or the official within the DoD Component to whom the requisite
authority has been delegated to authorize the negotiation or conclusion of an international
agreement. The following will be forwarded with the request to negotiate or conclude an
international agreement:

       (1) A draft text or outline of the proposed international agreement, or an explanation for
the unavailability of such a draft.

       (2) A legal memorandum:

           (a) Identifying any existing agreements to which the agreement relates.

           (b) Explaining provisions that significantly deviate from the template contained in a
blanket authorization, if applicable.

           (c) Addressing any new legal issues raised by the request.

           (d) Reciting the applicable constitutional, statutory, or other legal authority for
carrying out each obligation proposed to be undertaken by the United States, DoD, or DoD
Component in the proposed international agreement.

           (e) Identifying the applicable Circular-175 authorization and attaching a copy of such
authorization, if possible.

           (f) Explaining other relevant legal considerations.

        (3) A fiscal memorandum that specifies the estimated cost of each obligation proposed to
be undertaken by the United States, DoD, or DoD Component in the proposed international
agreement, and the source of funds to be obligated or a statement that additional funds for
carrying out the purpose of the proposed international agreement will be requested for a specified
fiscal year or years.

        (4) A policy memorandum explaining in detail why the proposed international agreement
is necessary or desirable, including any particular policy issues, the meaning of particular


SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                    19
                                                                     DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                         Change 1, January 17, 2025
provisions, and a summary of the risks and benefits relevant to any transfer of technology or
disclosure of information addressed in the agreement.

        (5) For international agreements under the authority of the USD(A&S), the legal, fiscal,
and policy memorandums may be combined into a single coordinated document, such as a
summary statement of intent as described in the September 14, 1994, Deputy Secretary of
Defense Memorandum and the Defense Acquisition Guidebook. For international agreements
under the authority of the USD(P), the legal, fiscal, and policy memorandums may be combined
into a single coordinated document.

        (6) For international agreements that allow for the provision or generation of classified
or controlled unclassified information, a delegation of disclosure authority letter (DDL) or other
written authorization approved by the DoD Component’s foreign disclosure office is required as
part of the request for authority to conclude an international agreement. The format in Figure 2
should be used for this purpose by cognizant DoD Components. Although all elements
identified should be provided generally in the order shown, information should be presented in
the clearest and easiest-to-use manner. For example, for complex systems, the usefulness of the
DDL may be enhanced if items 5 and 6 are broken out by major subsystem.

                                       Figure 2. DDL Format
1. Classification and categories permitted: Identify the highest classification of information to be
disclosed and specify the National Disclosure Policy (NDP) categories for disclosure.
2. Countries: Identify the countries or international organizations covered under the DDL.
3. Disclosure methods: e.g., oral, visual, or documentary.
4. Categories permitted: Specify NDP categories to be disclosed or released.
5. Scope: Specify who is authorized to release material or information, to whom disclosure is authorized,
and the purpose of the disclosure (e.g., to support a foreign military sales case or a cooperative
development program).
6. Authorized for disclosure: Describe material or information that may be disclosed.*
7. Not authorized for disclosure: Describe material or information that may not be disclosed.*
8. Procedures: Specify review and release procedures, special security procedures, or protective
measures to be imposed.
9. Redelegation: Specify the extent that redelegation of authority (if any) is permitted to subordinate
activities.
* = In addition to providing specific descriptions of disclosable and restricted material and information,
items 6 and 7 will also specify any imposed conditions or limitations to be imposed (e.g., time-phasing of
release, allowable forms for software, identification of items releasable only as finished, tested
assemblies.).
Note: Use the NDP-1 Security Classification Guide (SCG) to determine the classification of paragraphs 1
and 4. The classification of paragraphs 6 and 7 is dependent on the specific technology or system SCGs,
or other classified documents.




SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                             20
                                                              DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                  Change 1, January 17, 2025
        (7) Paragraphs 5.2.b.(1) through 5.2.b.(5) do not apply to standard form data or
information exchange annexes that are negotiated under the authority of a master agreement
prescribing the format of annexes, provided that such annexes do not have policy significance
and the requirements of Paragraph 5.1.p. have been met.

   c. The request may also include:

       (1) A request for the designation of a chief negotiator who also may be authorized to
conclude the international agreement.

       (2) A request for assistance in the negotiation from other DoD Components.

       (3) A request that the international agreement be negotiated and concluded by OSD or by
a U.S. Government department or agency other than DoD.

    d. The request will be supplemented with any other relevant information that the USD(P),
the USD(A&S), or other authorized DoD official considers necessary to reach a decision.

    e. Before granting any such request, the USD(P) or the USD(A&S), as applicable, or other
authorized DoD official must obtain concurrence from the GC DoD. The USD(P), the
USD(A&S), or other authorized DoD official must obtain concurrence from the USD(C)/CFO,
or their designee, if the international agreement involves the expenditure of DoD funds or has
funding implications.




SECTION 5: NEGOTIATING OR CONCLUDING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS                                    21
                                                                DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                    Change 1, January 17, 2025

                        SECTION 6: CENTRAL REPOSITORY

6.1. Except for agreements or arrangements referred to in Paragraph 6.3., one reproducible copy
of each international agreement, including any amendments and all accompanying papers,
including any implementing agreement or arrangement, annex, appendix, codicil, side
agreement, agreed minutes, side letter, project agreement or arrangement or other subsidiary
agreement or arrangement concluded under such international agreement, or any document of
similar purpose or function that is entered into contemporaneously and in conjunction with the
international agreement, must be sent by the DoD Component office responsible for concluding
the international agreement to the GC DoD by email at osd.pentagon.ogc.list.ia-
agreements@mail.mil for unclassified submissions and via SIPRnet at osd.pentagon.ogc.list.ia-
agreements@mail.smil.mil for classified submissions.

    a. The copies must be sent as soon as possible to arrive at the Office of the GC DoD no later
than 15 calendar days after the date the agreement or arrangement is signed or otherwise
concluded, or enters into force or effect, whichever occurs first.

    b. Each of the copies must be certified to be a true copy of the original prior to being
submitted by email to the GC DoD. Copies should be one-sided only. Copies may be certified
by any officer or U.S. civilian employee authorized by U.S. law to administer oaths or to make
acknowledgments. A background statement meeting the requirements of Part 181 of Title 22,
CFR, including the data points in Figure 1, will accompany the transmitted text.


6.2. The GC DoD will maintain the central repository, including an index updated at least once
per year, for all international agreements, with accompanying legal and fiscal memorandums
when required, which are coordinated, negotiated, or concluded by DoD personnel. Exceptions
to this requirement are:

   a. Agreements or arrangements in the intelligence field.

    b. Those documents not considered to constitute international agreements or arrangements
for the purposes of this issuance.


6.3. The DIR DIA will maintain a central repository of international agreements in the
intelligence field that are coordinated, negotiated, or concluded on their behalf. The repository
office will maintain an index of all such agreements. A copy of the updated index of
international agreements that entered into force or effect, or were amended, during the previous
calendar year must be provided to the GC DoD by March 31 of each year. The index will not
include agreements that the DIR DIA determines to be sensitive or compartmented. The index
will include at a minimum:

   a. The title of the international agreement.

   b. The classification of the international agreement.



SECTION 6: CENTRAL REPOSITORY                                                                   22
                                                              DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                  Change 1, January 17, 2025
   c. The DoD Component that negotiated and concluded the international agreement.

   d. The name of the foreign party with whom the agreement has been concluded.

   e. The date the agreement entered into force or effect.

   f. A brief statement of the general purpose of the agreement.

   g. The date of expiration or termination of the agreement, if applicable. For sensitive or
compartmented agreements, the DIR DIA will make separate arrangements with the GC DoD to
ensure that cognizance of such agreements is maintained.

   h. A copy of the letter or memorandum authorizing the DoD Component to negotiate and
conclude the international agreement.


6.4. When a question arises as to whether a document or set of documents constitutes an
international agreement, such document or documents must be forwarded in a timely fashion to
the GC DoD, who will determine if the document in question should be treated as an
international agreement and processed in accordance with Paragraph 5.1. and Sections 6 and 7.




SECTION 6: CENTRAL REPOSITORY                                                               23
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025

                    SECTION 7: CASE ACT IMPLEMENTATION

7.1. Part 181 of Title 22, CFR, which implements the Case Act, provides that, notwithstanding
any other provision of law, an international agreement may not be signed or otherwise concluded
on behalf of the United States without prior consultation with the Secretary of State.

    a. Before authorization is granted to negotiate or conclude an international agreement,
consultation with DOS will be accomplished by the GC DoD and the USD(P) or the USD(A&S),
as appropriate, for all international agreements having policy significance and for all
international agreements for which approval authority has not been subsequently delegated. (See
Paragraph 5.1.d., and the Case Act for further guidance.)

  b. Questions concerning the requirement to effect such coordination will be referred to the
GC DoD.


7.2. A DoD Component that enters into an international agreement must transmit the original
signed or initialed texts constituting the international agreement, together with all accompanying
papers, including any annex, appendix, codicil, side agreement, side letter, or any document of
similar purpose or function that is entered into contemporaneously and in conjunction with the
agreement, and any implementing agreement or arrangement or any document of similar purpose
or function that is entered into contemporaneously and in conjunction with the agreement,
directly to the Assistant Legal Adviser for Treaty Affairs, DOS; and to the GC DoD in
accordance with Section 6, as soon as possible to arrive at these offices no later than 15 calendar
days after the date the international agreement is signed or otherwise concluded.

    a. The texts transmitted must be accurate, legible, and complete, and must include the texts
in all languages in which the agreement was signed or initiated. Where the original texts of
concluded agreements are not available, certified copies must be transmitted in the same manner
as original texts. A certified copy must be an exact copy of the signed original.

    b. If the text of the international agreement is transmitted but not likely to be received within
15 calendar days after it is signed or otherwise concluded, the transmittal document must fully
and completely describe the reasons for the late submission. A background statement meeting
the requirements of Part 181 of Title 22, CFR, and in the format of Figure 1, must accompany
the transmitted text.


7.3. Any DoD Component that enters into an international intelligence agreement must, as soon
as possible, to arrive not later than 10 calendar days after the date the international agreement is
signed or otherwise concluded, provide the Defense Intelligence Agency with one complete
reproducible copy of the agreement along with a background statement meeting the requirements
of Part 181 of Title 22, CFR, and in the format of Figure 1. Agreements pertaining to signals
intelligence and delegated to the DIRNSA/CHCSS and agreements pertaining to geospatial
intelligence and delegated to the Director, NGA, are exempt from this requirement. The DIR




SECTION 7: CASE ACT IMPLEMENTATION                                                                24
                                                                DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                    Change 1, January 17, 2025
DIA will ensure that the text of the agreement is transmitted to the Assistant Legal Adviser for
Treaty Affairs, DOS.


7.4. Questions regarding whether an international agreement is required by the Case Act to be
transmitted to Congress will be referred to DOS through the USD(P), the USD(A&S), or the GC
DoD as appropriate. If determined appropriate, DOS will transmit the international agreement to
Congress.


7.5. When a question arises as to whether any document or set of documents constitutes an
international agreement within the meaning of the Case Act, such question will be referred
through and by the GC DoD to the Assistant Legal Adviser for Treaty Affairs, DOS.




SECTION 7: CASE ACT IMPLEMENTATION                                                                 25
                                                                 DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                     Change 1, January 17, 2025

                                          GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

 CFR                  Code of Federal Regulations
 CJCS                 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

 DDL                  delegation of disclosure authority letter
 DIR DIA              Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
 DIRNSA/CHCSS         Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
 DoD CIO              DoD Chief Information Officer
 DoDD                 DoD directive
 DoDI                 DoD instruction
 DOS                  Department of State
 DSCA                 Defense Security Cooperation Agency

 GC DoD               General Counsel of the Department of Defense

 IC                   International Cooperation

 NATO                 North Atlantic Treaty Organization
 NDP                  National Disclosure Policy
 NGA                  National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency

 PSI                  program security instruction

 SCG                  security classification guide
 SJA                  Staff Judge Advocate
 U.S.C.               United States Code
 USD(A&S)             Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
 USD(C)/CFO           Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                      Department of Defense
 USD(I&S)             Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
 USD(P)               Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


G.2. DEFINITIONS. These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

chapeau agreement. A bilateral agreement that establishes legally binding commitments under
international law affecting major aspects of cooperation such as logistical support, liability, and
property rights, including intellectual property rights, that are applicable to non-binding written
arrangements in the course of mutual defense activities when invoked by or for that applicable
arrangement.


GLOSSARY                                                                                         26
                                                                DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                    Change 1, January 17, 2025


conclusion. The act of signing, initialing, responding to, or otherwise indicating the acceptance
of an international agreement by a department or agency of the U.S. Government.

DoD Component head. A head of one of the DoD Components, as identified in
DoDD 5100.01.

international agreement. Any agreement concluded with one or more foreign governments,
including their agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, or with an international
organization that:

  Is signed or agreed to by personnel of any DoD Component, or by representatives of the
DOS or any other department or agency of the U.S. Government.

    Signifies the intent of the parties to be bound under international law. The intent of the
parties to have their undertaking governed by international law need not be manifested by a
third-party dispute settlement mechanism or any express reference to international law. A DoD
Component’s General Counsel or SJA must be consulted when making a determination as to
whether an international agreement or arrangement is binding under international law.

     Is denominated as an international agreement or as a memorandum of understanding,
memorandum of agreement, memorandum of arrangement, exchange of notes, exchange of
letters, technical arrangement, protocol, note verbale, aide memoire, agreed minute, arrangement,
statement of intent, letter of intent, statement of understanding, or any other name connoting a
similar legal consequence. This includes any implementing agreement or arrangement, annex,
project agreement or arrangement, or other subsidiary arrangement to a master agreement or
arrangement.

   Any oral agreement that meets the criteria of this definition is an international agreement.
The DoD representative who enters into an oral agreement will cause such agreement to be
reduced to writing. In written form, the agreement is subject to the requirements of this issuance.

The following do not constitute international agreements for the purposes of this issuance:

   Contracts made under the Federal Acquisition Regulation.

   Foreign military sales credit agreements.

  Foreign military sales letters of offer and acceptance executed in the format managed by
DSCA.

    Standardization Agreements such as NATO Standardization Agreements; American, British,
Canadian, Australian, and New Zealand Standards; and Air and Space Interoperability Council
Air Standards, which record the adoption of like or similar military equipment, ammunition,
supplies, and stores or operational, logistic, and administrative procedures. A NATO
Standardization Agreement that provides for mutual support or cross-servicing of military
equipment, ammunition, supplies, and stores or for mutual rendering of defense services,
including training, is considered an international agreement.


GLOSSARY                                                                                           27
                                                                DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                    Change 1, January 17, 2025
    Leases with foreign governments and commercial entities pursuant to Section 2675 of
Title 10, U.S.C., and with foreign governments and international organizations pursuant to
Section 2796 of Title 22, U.S.C.

   Agreements made solely to establish administrative procedures.

    Acquisitions or orders pursuant to acquisition and cross-servicing agreements made in
accordance with the authority of Sections 2341 or 2342 of Title 10, U.S.C. and DoDD 2010.09,
and implementing arrangements pursuant to DoDD 2010.09 unless they create a binding
obligation under international law. Umbrella agreements and cross-servicing agreements
pursuant to DoDD 2010.09 are international agreements.

negotiation. Communication by any means of a position or an offer, on behalf of the United
States, the DoD, or any officer or organizational element thereof, to an agent or representative of
a foreign government, including an agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof, or of
an international organization, in such detail that the acceptance in substance of such position or
offer would result in an international agreement.

    The term includes any such communication, even though the agreement may be conditioned
on later approval by the responsible authority.

    The term also includes the presentation of a draft agreement or other document, the
acceptance of which would constitute an agreement, as well as discussions concerning any U.S.
or foreign government or international organization draft document whether or not titled
“agreement.”

    The term does not include preliminary or exploratory discussions, consultations, or routine
meetings where no proposed texts or draft documents are presented, so long as such discussions
or meetings are conducted with the understanding that the views communicated do not and will
not bind or commit any side, legally or otherwise.

original delegating authority. The DoD Component granted the authority to negotiate and
conclude international agreements pursuant to this issuance, and that subsequently redelegates
such authority.

PSI. Provides guidance used to supplement national security rules of the participant countries
under which classified information and materiel are normally protected. It should be used to
reconcile differences in national policies so that standard procedures will be used for the
international program, and will be approved by the national or designated security authorities of
all participant countries. Along with the SCG, the PSI should be initiated concurrently with
development of the request for authority to develop an international agreement involving the
exchange of classified information.

security arrangement or assurance. An indication, other than a binding obligation, that the
United States will take some action short of acting in the common defense of another state that
has been subject to an armed attack. An example would be an agreement to consult promptly
with another state in the event of a threat to that state’s security and stability.



GLOSSARY                                                                                          28
                                                            DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                Change 1, January 17, 2025
security commitment. A binding obligation incurred by the United States to act in the common
defense of another state that has been subject to armed attack.




GLOSSARY                                                                                  29
                                                             DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                                 Change 1, January 17, 2025

                                      REFERENCES
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 22, Part 181
Defense Acquisition Guidebook, current edition
Department of State, “Foreign Affairs Manual,” current edition (Subchapter 720 of Volume 11 is
   also known as the “Department of State Circular-175 Procedures”)
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Streamlining the Development of International
   Research and Development (R&D) Agreements,” September 14, 1994
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under Secretary
   of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense
   for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
DoD Directive 2010.09, “Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreements,” April 28, 2003, as
   amended
DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and its Major Components,”
   December 21, 2010, as amended
DoD Directive 5105.72, “Defense Technology Security Administration (DTSA),” April 26, 2016
DoD Directive 5111.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” June 23, 2020
DoD Directive 5135.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
   (USD(A&S)),” July 15, 2020
DoD Directive 5144.02, “DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO),” November 21, 2014, as
   amended
DoD Directive 5145.01, “General Counsel of the Department of Defense,” January 17, 2025
DoD Directive 5230.11, “Disclosure of Classified Military Information to Foreign Governments
   and International Organizations,” November 7, 2023
DoD Directive 5230.20, “Visits and Assignments of Foreign Nationals,” June 22, 2005
DoD Instruction 2010.06, “Materiel Interoperability and Standardization with Allies and
   Coalition Partners,” July 29, 2009, as amended
DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Adaptive Acquisition Framework,” January 23,
   2020, as amended
DoD Instruction 5015.02, “DoD Records Management Program,” February 24, 2015, as
   amended
Federal Acquisition Regulation, current edition
National Disclosure Policy-1, “National Policy and Procedures for the Disclosure of Classified
   Military Information to Foreign Governments and International Organizations,” February 14,
   2017
National Disclosure Policy Security Classification Guide, April 10, 2017
Public Law 117-263, Section 5947, “James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for
   Fiscal Year 2023,” December 23, 2022
Unified Command Plan, current edition
United States Code, Title 1, Section 112b
United States Code, Title 10


REFERENCES                                                                                 30
                                             DoDI 5530.03, December 4, 2019
                                                 Change 1, January 17, 2025
United States Code, Title 22, Section 2796




REFERENCES                                                              31
