                             Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 1325.06
                                                                            November 27, 2009
                                                  Incorporating Change 3, Effective June 9, 2025

                                                                                      USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Handling Protest, Extremist, and Criminal Gang Activities Among Members of the
Armed Forces

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive 1325.6 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction in accordance with
the authority in DoD Directive 5124.02 (Reference (b)).

    b. Establishes DoD policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for handling
protest, extremist, and criminal gang activities by members of the Armed Forces.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department
of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. The Department of Defense shall safeguard the security of the United States.

     b. A Service member’s right of expression should be preserved to the maximum extent
possible in accordance with the First Amendment of the Constitution and statutory provisions of
titles 10 and 18, United States Code (U.S.C.) (References (c) and (d), respectively) (examples of
which are set forth in Enclosure 2 of this Instruction) and consistent with good order and
discipline and the national security.
                                                                DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


   c. A commander must not be indifferent to conduct that, if allowed to proceed unchecked,
would destroy or diminish the effectiveness of his or her unit.

   d. The proper balancing of these interests depends largely upon the calm and prudent
judgment of the responsible commander.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R)
shall:

       (1) Develop overall policy and guidelines for handling protest, extremist, and criminal
gang activities among members of the Armed Forces.

       (2) Approve policies and procedures that the Secretaries of the Military Departments
develop to implement this Instruction.

    b. Secretaries of the Military Departments. The Secretaries of the Military Departments
shall:

       (1) Establish policies and procedures, including updating punitive regulations where
necessary, to implement this Instruction within their respective Departments.

        (2) Ensure compliance with the training requirements set forth in paragraph 9.d.(4) and
10.e. of Enclosure 3 of this Instruction.

   c. Commandant of the Coast Guard. The Commandant of the Coast Guard shall:

         (1) Establish policies and procedures to implement this Instruction within the Coast
Guard.

        (2) Ensure compliance with the training requirements set forth in paragraph 9.d.(4) and
10.e. of Enclosure 3 of this Instruction.


5. PROCEDURES. The procedures set forth in Enclosure 3 provide guidelines that shall be
applied to handling protest, extremist, and criminal gang activities among Service members.
Specific problems shall be resolved only on the basis of the particular facts of the situation and in
accordance with the provisions of Enclosure 3; other applicable DoD issuances; chapter 47 of
Reference (c); and other applicable laws and regulations.


6. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 3, 06/09/2025                          2
                                                            DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
language to comply with Executive Order 14168 (Reference (l)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective immediately.


Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Constitutional and Statutory Provisions Relevant to Handling Protest,
   Extremist, and Criminal Gang Activities in the Armed Forces
   3. Procedures
   Glossary




Change 3, 06/09/2025                       3
                                                            DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 1325.6, “Guidelines for Handling Dissident and Protest Activities Among
      Members of the Armed Forces,” October 1, 1996 (hereby canceled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c)   Title 10, United States Code
(d)   Title 18, United States Code
(e)   The First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States
(f)   DoD Instruction 4105.70, “Sale or Rental of Sexually Explicit Material on DoD Property,”
      June 2, 2006
(g)   DoD 5500.7-R, “Joint Ethics Regulation (JER),” August 1993
(h)   DoD Instruction 1334.1, “Wearing of the Uniform,” October 26, 2005
(i)   DoD Manual 5200.02, “Procedures for the DoD Personnel Security Program (PSP),” April
      3, 2017, as amended
(j)   Public Law 116-283, “The William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization
      Act for Fiscal Year 2021,” January 1, 2021
(k)   Public Law 110-181, “The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008,”
      January 28, 2008
(l)   Executive Order 14168, “Defending Women from Gender Ideology Extremism and
      Restoring Biological Truth to the Federal Government,” January 20, 2025




Change 3, 06/09/2025                           4                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

  CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS RELEVANT TO HANDLING
PROTEST, EXTREMIST, AND CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITIES IN THE ARMED FORCES


1. CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS. The First Amendment to the Constitution of the United
States (Reference (e)) provides that “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the
press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a
redress of grievances.”


2. STATUTORY PROVISIONS

    a. Applicable to Members of the Armed Forces. These sections (among others) of Reference
(c) apply to members of the Armed Forces:

       (1) Section 882 (Article 82). Solicitation.

       (2) Section 888 (Article 88). Contempt toward officials.

       (3) Section 889 (Article 89). Disrespect toward superior commissioned officer.

      (4) Section 891 (Article 91). Insubordinate conduct toward warrant officer,
noncommissioned officer, or petty officer.

       (5) Section 892 (Article 92). Failure to obey order or regulation

       (6) Section 901 (Article 101). Improper use of countersign.

       (7) Section 903b (Article 103b). Aiding the enemy.

       (8) Section 917 (Article 117). Provoking speeches or gestures.

       (9) Section 934 (Article 134). General Article.

       (10) Section 938 (Article 138). Complaints of wrongs.

        (11) Section 1034. Protected communications; prohibition of retaliatory personnel
actions.

    b. Applicable to All Persons. These sections of title 18 of (Reference (d) apply to all
persons, military and civilian, who are subject to that title:

       (1) Section 1381. Enticing desertion and harboring deserters.



Change 3, 06/09/2025                             5                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                           DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009



      (2) Section 2385. Advocating overthrow of the Government.

      (3) Section 2387. Activities affecting the Armed Forces generally.

      (4) Section 2388. Activities affecting the Armed Forces during war.




Change 3, 06/09/2025                         6                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


                                           ENCLOSURE 3

                                           PROCEDURES


1. POSSESSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF PRINTED AND ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
ON POST.

    a. A commander is not authorized to prohibit the distribution of a specific issue of a
publication distributed through official outlets such as post exchanges and military libraries.
Prohibiting the sale or rental of sexually explicit material on DoD property is governed by DoD
Instruction 4105.70 (Reference (f)).

        (1) A commander may require prior approval of publications to be distributed on a
military installation through other than official outlets to determine if the publication would:

                (a) Create a clear danger to the loyalty, discipline, or morale of military
personnel; or

                (b) Materially interfere with the accomplishment of the military mission.

       (2) Distribution of any publication determined to be a danger in any of the areas in
paragraphs 1.a.(1)(a) and 1.a.(1)(b) of this enclosure shall be prohibited.

    b. While the mere possession of unauthorized printed material may not be prohibited, printed
material that is prohibited from distribution shall be impounded if the commander determines
that an attempt will be made to distribute it.

   c. The fact that a publication is critical of government policies or officials is not, in itself, a
ground on which distribution may be prohibited.


2. OFF-POST GATHERING PLACES. Commanders have the authority to place establishments
off-limits in accordance with established procedures when, for example, the activities taking
place at these establishments include, but are not limited to, counseling, encouraging, or inciting
Service members to refuse to perform duty or to desert; pose a significant adverse effect on
Service members’ health, morale, or welfare; or otherwise present a clear danger to the loyalty,
discipline, or morale of a member or military unit.


3. SERVICE MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS. Commanders are not authorized to recognize or
to bargain with any union representing or seeking recognition to represent Service members.




Change 3, 06/09/2025                               7                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


4. PUBLICATION OF PERSONAL WRITING MATTERS (TO INCLUDE WEB SITES,
WEB LOGS (BLOGS), AND OTHER ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS). Service
members may not pursue personal writing for publication whether by traditional written or by
electronic means (Web sites, blogs, and other electronic communications) during duty hours, nor
may they use Government or non-appropriated funds or property for this purpose, on or off duty,
unless it is for official use or authorized purposes only pursuant to section 2-301 of DoD 5500.7-
R (Reference (g)). Publication of such matters by military personnel off-post, on their own time,
and with their own money and equipment is not prohibited; however, if such a publication
contains language the utterance of which is punishable under the Uniform Code of Military
Justice or other Federal law or otherwise violates this Instruction or other DoD issuances, those
involved in printing, publishing, or distributing the publication may face appropriate disciplinary
or administrative action for such infractions.


5. ON-POST DEMONSTRATIONS AND SIMILAR ACTIVITIES.

    a. The commander of a military installation or other military-controlled facility under the
jurisdiction of the United States shall prohibit any demonstration or activity on the installation or
facility that could:

        (1) Result in interference with or prevention of orderly accomplishment of the mission of
the installation or facility; or

     (2) Present a clear and present danger to the loyalty, discipline, or morale of the Service
members.

    b. It is a crime for any person to enter a military reservation for any purpose prohibited by
law or lawful regulations, or for any person to enter or re-enter an installation after having been
barred by order of the commander pursuant to section 1382 of Reference (d).


6. OFF-POST DEMONSTRATIONS BY SERVICE MEMBERS. Members of the Armed
Forces are prohibited from participating in off-post demonstrations under any of these
circumstances:

   a. They are on-duty.

   b. They are in a foreign country.

   c. The activities constitute a breach of law and order.

   d. Violence is likely to result.

   e. They are in uniform in violation of DoD Instruction 1334.1 (Reference (h)).




Change 3, 06/09/2025                              8                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


7. GRIEVANCES. The right of members to complain and request redress of grievances against
actions of their commanders is protected by section 938 (article 138) of Reference (c). In
addition, a member may petition or present any grievance to any member of Congress or an
inspector general, among other officials, pursuant to section 1034 of Reference (c). An open-
door policy for complaints is a basic principle of good leadership. Commanders should
personally ensure that adequate procedures exist for identifying valid complaints and taking
corrective action.


8. EXTREMIST ACTIVITIES. This Section identifies harms to the military from extremist
activities, discusses the authority of the commander to maintain good order and discipline, and
lists prohibited actions by members of the Armed Forces involving extremist activities.

    a. Extremist activities are inconsistent with the responsibilities and obligations of military
service, as well as the oaths of office and enlistment, and can be prohibited even in some
circumstances in which such activities would be constitutionally protected in a civilian setting.
Active participation in extremist activities as defined below is prohibited and, as appropriate,
may be punished in the military context for several overlapping, compelling reasons. First, such
active participation undermines morale and reduces combat readiness. Second, it calls into
question the individual’s ability to follow orders from, or effectively lead and serve with, persons
of diverse backgrounds, preventing maximum utilization and development of the Department’s
most valuable asset: its people. Finally, such behavior damages the Nation’s trust and
confidence in the Department as an institution and the military as a professional fighting force.

    b. Enforcement of this policy is the responsibility of every command. It is the commander’s
responsibility to maintain good order and discipline in the unit, and every commander has the
inherent authority and responsibility to take appropriate actions to accomplish this goal. Active
participation in extremist activities (which includes some forms of conduct with respect to
groups and organizations that actively participate in extremist activities) does not accord with
military values and is not conducive to good order and discipline. All Service members will
cultivate an environment free from extremist activities. Service members will be held
appropriately accountable for active participation in extremist activities, whether in their
individual capacity or on behalf of a group.

   c. Military personnel are prohibited from actively participating in extremist activities.

       (1) Extremist Activities. The term “extremist activities” means:

           (a) Advocating or engaging in unlawful force, unlawful violence, or other illegal
means to deprive individuals of their rights under the United States Constitution or the laws of
the United States, including those of any State, Commonwealth, Territory, or the District of
Columbia, or any political subdivision thereof.

             (b) Advocating or engaging in unlawful force or violence to achieve goals that are
political, religious, discriminatory, or ideological in nature.




Change 3, 06/09/2025                             9                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


           (c) Advocating, engaging in, or supporting terrorism, within the United States or
abroad.

            (d) Advocating, engaging in, or supporting the overthrow of the government of the
United States, or any political subdivision thereof, including that of any State, Commonwealth,
Territory, or the District of Columbia, by force or violence; or seeking to alter the form of these
governments by unconstitutional or other unlawful means (e.g., sedition).

             (e) Advocating or encouraging military, civilian, or contractor personnel within the
DoD or United States Coast Guard to violate the laws of the United States, or any political
subdivision thereof, including that of any State, Commonwealth, Territory, or the District of
Columbia, or to disobey lawful orders or regulations, for the purpose of disrupting military
activities (e,g., subversion), or personally undertaking the same.

             (f) Advocating widespread unlawful discrimination based on race, color, national
origin, religion, sex (including pregnancy), or sexual orientation.

        (2) Active Participation. For purposes of this section, the term “active participation”
means the following, except where such activity is within the scope of an official duty (e.g.,
intelligence or law enforcement operations):

           (a) Advocating or engaging in the use or threat of unlawful force or violence in
support of extremist activities.

           (b) Advocating for, or providing material support or resources to, individuals or
organizations that promote or threaten the unlawful use of force or violence in support of
extremist activities, with the intent to support such promotion or threats.

            (c) Knowingly communicating information that compromises the operational
security of any military organization or mission, in support of extremist activities.

           (d) Recruiting or training others to engage in extremist activities.

           (e) Fundraising for, or making personal contributions through donations of any kind
(including but not limited to the solicitation, collection, or payment of fees or dues) to, a group or
organization that engages in extremist activities, with the intent to support those activities.

           (f) Creating, organizing, or taking a leadership role in a group or organization that
engages in or advocates for extremist activities, with knowledge of those activities.

          (g) Actively demonstrating or rallying in support of extremist activities (but not
merely observing such demonstrations or rallies as a spectator).

           (h) Attending a meeting or activity with the knowledge that the meeting or activity
involves extremist activities, with the intent to support those activities:




Change 3, 06/09/2025                             10                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


               1. When the nature of the meeting or activity constitutes a breach of law and
order;

                2. When a reasonable person would determine the meeting or activity is likely to
result in violence; or

               3. In violation of off-limits sanctions or other lawful orders.

              (i) Distributing literature or other promotional materials, on or off a military
installation, the primary purpose and content of which is to advocate for extremist activities, with
the intent to promote that advocacy.

            (j) Knowingly receiving material support or resources from a person or organization
that advocates or actively participates in extremist activities with the intent to use the material
support or resources in support of extremist activities.

            (k) When using a government communications system and with the intent to support
extremist activities, knowingly accessing internet web sites or other materials that promote or
advocate extremist activities.

              (l) Knowingly displaying paraphernalia, words, or symbols in support of extremist
activities or in support of groups or organizations that support extremist activities, such as flags,
clothing, tattoos, and bumper stickers, whether on or off a military installation.

            (m) Engaging in electronic and cyber activities regarding extremist activities, or
groups that support extremist activities – including posting, liking, sharing, re-tweeting, or
otherwise distributing content – when such action is taken with the intent to promote or
otherwise endorse extremist activities. Military personnel are responsible for the content they
publish on all personal and public Internet domains, including social media sites, blogs, websites,
and applications.

             (n) Knowingly taking any other action in support of, or engaging in, extremist
activities, when such conduct is prejudicial to good order and discipline or is service-
discrediting.


9. COMMAND AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

    a. Commanders have the authority and responsibility to prohibit Service members from
active participation in extremist activities, and other activities that adversely affect good order
and discipline within the command. This includes, but is not limited to, the authority to order the
removal of symbols, flags, posters, or other displays from military-controlled areas, to place
areas or activities off-limits, and to order Service members not to participate in activities that are
contrary to the good order and discipline of the unit, or pose a threat to the health, safety, and
security of military personnel or a military installation.




Change 3, 06/09/2025                             11                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


     b. Commanders may, as appropriate, pursue adverse administrative action in addition to or
in lieu of punitive action in response to a Service member’s active participation in extremist
activities, pursuant to military service regulations and other existing authorities. Adverse
administrative action may include involuntary separation, reassignment, loss of security
clearance, denial of reenlistment, and other administrative or disciplinary actions deemed
appropriate by the commander, based on the specific facts and circumstances of the particular
case.

    c. Preventive Activities. Commanders should remain alert for signs of future extremist
activities. Commanders should intervene early, primarily through counseling, when observing
such signs even though the signs may not rise to the level of active participation or threaten good
order and discipline, but only suggest such potential. The goal of early intervention is to
minimize the risk of future extremist activities. In these situations, commanders will educate the
Service member regarding the potential adverse effects of their actions.

       (1) For example, commanders may advise Service members that extremist activities are
inconsistent with the military’s goals, beliefs, and values, as well as the oaths of office and
enlistment. Additionally, commanders may advise Service members that active participation in
extremist activities:

           (a) Will be taken into consideration when evaluating duty performance, to include
appropriate remarks on evaluation reports.

           (b) Will be taken into consideration when selections for positions of leadership and
responsibility or military educational opportunities are made.

            (c) Will result in a report to the appropriate agency for possible revocation of
security clearance, which may lead to separation from the Armed Forces.

           (d) May result in reassignment.

           (e) May result in reclassification or bar to reenlistment actions, as appropriate.

           (f) Will result in reports to law enforcement and/or counterintelligence authorities, as
appropriate.

        (2) Commanders should consider all available resources to assist Service members
showing signs of potential involvement in extremist activities, such as command-directed mental
health evaluations, financial counseling sessions, etc.

    d. Reporting Requirements. Commanders should remain attentive for signs of extremism
involving Service members in their command, even though the signs may not rise to the level of
active participation or threaten good order and discipline, but only suggest such potential. A
commander notified of suspected extremist activities must take appropriate actions to investigate
and address the allegations in consultation with their servicing judge advocate.




Change 3, 06/09/2025                             12                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


       (1) Upon a credible report or suspicion of extremist activities, commanders will notify
the appropriate:

             (a) Military Criminal Investigative Organization(s).

             (b) Counterintelligence organization(s), as appropriate.

             (c) Command security manager, if the military member possesses a security
clearance.

             (d) Legal office.

             (e) Insider Threat Hub.

        (2) Additionally, where appropriate, the commander will ensure that substantiated
allegations of active participation in extremist activities are recorded in the personnel system of
record, in accordance with Reference (i) and applicable Military Service guidance.

        (3) Each Military Department is required to establish a mechanism for commands to
report extremist activities by Service members. The Military Departments must track all
reported extremist activity, conforming with the requirements of Section 554 of Reference (j).

        (4) The Military Departments shall ensure that the policy and procedures on prohibited
activities in Paragraphs 8-9 of this enclosure are included in initial active duty training,
precommissioning training, professional military education, commander training, and other
appropriate Service training programs.


10. CRIMINAL GANGS

   a. Service members must not actively advocate criminal gang doctrine, ideology, or causes.

    b. Service members must reject active participation in criminal gangs pursuant to section
544 of Public Law 110-181 (Reference (k)) and in other organizations that advocate criminal
gang doctrine, ideology, or causes. Active participation in such gangs or organizations is
prohibited. Active participation, as applied to criminal gangs, includes, but is not limited to,
fundraising; demonstrating or rallying; recruiting, training, organizing, or leading members;
distributing material (including posting on-line); knowingly wearing gang colors or clothing;
having tattoos or body markings associated with such gangs or organizations; or otherwise
engaging in activities in furtherance of the objective of such gangs or organizations that are
detrimental to good order, discipline, or mission accomplishment or are otherwise incompatible
with military service.

    c. Commanders have the authority to employ the full range of administrative and
disciplinary actions, including administrative separation or appropriate criminal action, against
Service members who engage in activity prohibited in paragraphs 10.a. or 10.b. of this enclosure.



Change 3, 06/09/2025                             13                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


    d. The functions of command include vigilance about the existence of such activities; active
use of investigative authority to include a prompt and fair complaint process; and use of
administrative powers such as counseling, reprimands, orders, and performance evaluations to
deter such activities.

    e. The Military Departments shall ensure that the policy and procedures on prohibited
activities in this Paragraph are included in initial active duty training, precommissioning training,
professional military education, commander training, and other appropriate Service training
programs.

    f. Preventive Activities. Commanders must remain alert for signs of future prohibited
criminal gang activities. They should intervene early, primarily through counseling, when
observing such signs even though the signs may not rise to active advocacy or active
participation or may not threaten good order and discipline, but only suggest such potential. The
goal of early intervention is to minimize the risk of future criminal gang activities.




Change 3, 06/09/2025                             14                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009



                                         GLOSSARY


DEFINITIONS. These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

 TERM                    DEFINITION

 advocacy                When made with the intent to promote or endorse extremist or
                         criminal gang activities, affirmative statements or actions taken to
                         encourage action, promote an organization, or further the spread of
                         information regarding extremist activities. Advocacy may occur
                         through oral, written, electronic or nonverbal communication,
                         including the display of images or symbols.

 liking                  The use of the “like” function on social media platforms, generally to
                         signal endorsement or support of the “liked” content. Liking
                         includes the use of emojis or reactions that signal endorsement or
                         support, or platform-specific actions such as “favoriting,” when also
                         implying endorsement. Liking, in the context of the communication
                         concerned, must imply or state endorsement, agreement or promoting
                         of the content.

 literature              Printed materials, leaflets, circulars, or other written materials,
                         including electronic or cyber content.

 material support or     Any property, tangible or intangible, or service, including currency or
 resources               monetary instruments or financial securities, financial services,
                         lodging, training, expert advice or assistance, safehouses, false
                         documentation or identification, communications equipment,
                         facilities, weapons, lethal substances, explosives, personnel (one or
                         more individuals who may be or include oneself), and transportation,
                         except medicine or religious materials.

 sharing                 In the social media, electronic, or cyber context, an action taken to
                         replicate content from one online location to another (with or without
                         additional comment), typically for viewing by other members of an
                         individual’s social media network. Sharing also includes, but is not
                         limited to, platform-specific terms such as “re-tweeting.”

 subversion              Actions designed to undermine the military, economic,
                         psychological, or political strength or morale of a governing
                         authority.




Change 3, 06/09/2025                           15                             GLOSSARY
                                                              DoDI 1325.06, November 27, 2009


 TERM                  DEFINITION

 terrorism             The unlawful use of violence or threat of violence, often motivated
                       by religious, political, or other ideological beliefs, to instill fear and
                       coerce individuals, governments or societies in pursuit of terrorist
                       goals.

 widespread unlawful   Extensive discrimination, including disparate treatment of individuals
 discrimination        or groups on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex
                       (including pregnancy), or sexual orientation, that deprives such
                       persons or groups of constitutional rights or violates Federal, state or
                       local laws, such as those concerning civil rights and fair housing. It
                       does not include discrimination that is authorized by law, military
                       regulations, or military policies; lawful efforts to overturn, amend, or
                       enact laws applicable to discrimination or lawful support for causes
                       or organizations that engage in such efforts; or isolated incidents of
                       discrimination.




Change 3, 06/09/2025                         16                               GLOSSARY
