                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION
                                                                            NUMBER 5000.72
                                                                                March 26, 2015
                                                      Incorporating Change 2, November 6, 2020

                                                                                       USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:      DoD Standard for Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR) Certification

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5135.02 (Reference (a)), this
instruction:

    a. Establishes policies and standards, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures to
certify CORs to implement the recommendation of the DoD Panel on Contracting Integrity set
out in the 2008 report to Congress (Reference (b)).

   b. Establishes uniform guidance for identification, development, certification, and
management of CORs within the DoD.

   c. Implements Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (c)).

   d. Incorporates and cancels the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology,
and Logistics Memorandum (Reference (d)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction:

   a. Applies to:

        (1) OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD
Components”).

       (2) Contracting officers, personnel with authorities and responsibilities in accordance
with subpart 1.602-2 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation (Reference (e)).
                                                                  DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


       (3) CORs, personnel delegated specific responsibilities by the contracting officer in
accordance with subpart 1.602-2 of Reference (e) and subpart 201.602-2 of the Defense Federal
Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS) (Reference (f)).

       (4) Requiring activities and management of CORs including individual COR
supervisors.

   b. Does not apply to personnel assigned to provide:

       (1) Contract administration support pursuant to subpart 42.202(a) of Reference (e).

       (2) Quality assurance support in accordance with subpart 46.502 of Reference (e).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. All CORs must be employees, military or civilian, of the U.S. Government, a foreign
government, or North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)/coalition partners. In no case will
contractor personnel serve as CORs.

    b. Contracting officers will designate a COR for all service contracts, including construction,
unless the contracting officer retains and executes contract oversight responsibilities when the
conditions of subpart 201.602-2 of the DFARS Procedures, Guidance, and Information
(Reference (g)) exist. CORs may be required for any other contract when the need for a COR is
determined by the contracting officer. The contracting officer always has the right to designate a
COR when it is in the best interest of the U.S. Government.

    c. A qualified COR is designated for all contracts or orders placed for DoD requirements,
regardless of whether or not contract actions are executed by a DoD or non-DoD contracting
officer. In the event that a non-DoD COR is designated by the contracting officer, the designated
COR must meet either all DoD COR training and experience requirements or Federal
Acquisition Certification-COR training and certification requirements.

    d. Surveillance activities performed by CORs are tailored to the dollar value and complexity
of the specific contract for which they are designated.

   e. Minimum COR competencies, experience, and training depend on the dollar value,
complexity of the requirement, and contract performance risk for which the COR is designated.
For purposes of this instruction, the types of standards are:

       (1) Type A: Fixed-price contracts without incentives and low performance risk.

       (2) Type B: Fixed-price contracts with incentives; fixed-price contracts with other than
low performance risk; and other than fixed-price contracts. This includes everything other than
Types A and C.




Change 2, 11/06/2020                            2
                                                                  DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


       (3) Type C: Unique contract requirements that necessitate the COR have a higher
education or specialized training beyond the Type B requirements.

    f. The contracting officer will determine whether the duties and responsibilities of the COR
meet the criteria for filing a Confidential Financial Disclosure Report (OGE Form 450) as set
forth in section 2634.904 of Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (h)), and section 7-
300 of DoD 5500.07-R (Reference (i)). CORs designated as OGE Form 450 filers will submit a
new entrant report and, if applicable, annual reports thereafter to the supervisor through the
contracting officer to the ethics counselor for final review and certification. The contracting
officer will use his or her judgment to decide if a COR needs to file an OGE Form 450 after
considering the COR’s designated duties and responsibilities and level of supervision and
review. A COR should be designated as an OGE Form 450 filer if the COR will exercise
significant judgment without substantial supervision and review.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


 6. INFORMATION COLLECTIONS. The Confidential Financial Disclosure Report rendered
 throughout this issuance has been assigned the Office of Management and Budget control
 number 3209-0006 in accordance with the procedures in Volume 2 of DoD
 Manual 8910.01(Reference (p)). The expiration date of this information collection is listed on
 the DoD Information Collections System at https://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/PRASearch.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. The changes to this issuance:

    a. Incorporate the DoD’s decision to re-engineer the Contracting Officer Representative
Tracking Tool into two separate modules, the Joint Appointment Module (JAM) and
Surveillance and Performance Monitoring (SPM), and associated changes to the COR process.

    b. Reflect that the Combating Trafficking in Persons (CTIP) training is now required every
3 years in accordance with Reference (o).

   c. Remove the requirement to take Wide Area Workflow (WAWF) Training.




Change 2, 11/06/2020                            3
                                                            DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective March 26, 2015.




                                            Frank Kendall
                                            Under Secretary of Defense
                                            For Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics


Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   4. COR Documentation
   5. Qualification Requirements for CORs
   6. Examples of COR Responsibilities and COR Certification Requirements
Glossary




Change 2, 11/06/2020                        4
                                                                                               DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................6

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................7

     PRESIDENT, DEFENSE ACQUISITION UNIVERSITY (DAU) ..........................................7
     DOD COMPONENTS HEADS ................................................................................................7

ENCLOSURE 3: PROCEDURES ..................................................................................................9

     CONTRACTING OFFICER .....................................................................................................9
     REQUIRING ACTIVITY OR COR MANAGEMENT ..........................................................11
     COR NOMINEE OR COR ......................................................................................................13

ENCLOSURE 4: COR DOCUMENTATION..............................................................................15

     COR NOMINATION ..............................................................................................................15
     COR LETTER OF DESIGNATION VIA JAM ......................................................................16
     TERMINATING THE LETTER OF DESIGNATION ...........................................................17
     JAM AND SPM MODULES...................................................................................................17

ENCLOSURE 5: QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR CORS.......................................19

     TRAINING REQUIREMENTS ..............................................................................................19
     AGENCY EXPERIENCE .......................................................................................................20
     RELEVANT TECHNICAL EXPERIENCE ...........................................................................21
     COMPETENCIES ...................................................................................................................21
     REFRESHER TRAINING.......................................................................................................22
     WAIVER OF TRAINING .......................................................................................................23

ENCLOSURE 6: EXAMPLES OF COR RESPONSIBILITIES AND COR
  CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................................24

TABLES

     1. Examples of COR Responsibilities.....................................................................................24
     2. DoD Standard for Certification of CORs – Type A….. .....................................................28
     3. DoD Standard for Certification of CORs – Type B ............................................................29
     4. DoD Standard for Certification of CORs – Type C ............................................................30

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................31

     PART I: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................31
     PART II: DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................32

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                                                           CONTENTS
                                                                     5
                                                                DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5135.02, “Under Secretary of Defense For Acquisition And Sustainment
      (USD(A&S)),” July 15, 2020
(b)   DoD Panel on Contracting Integrity 2008 Report to Congress, January 5, 2009
(c)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Monitoring Contract Performance in
      Contracts for Services,” August 22, 2008
(d)   Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Memorandum,
      “DoD Standard for Certification of Contracting Officer’s Representatives (COR) for
      Service Acquisitions,” March 29, 2010 (hereby cancelled)
(e)   Federal Acquisition Regulation, current edition
(f)   Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement, current edition
(g)   Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement Procedures, Guidance, and
      Information, current edition
(h)   Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations
(i)   DoD 5500.07-R, “Joint Ethics Regulation (JER),” August 30, 1993, as amended
(j)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
      Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
      of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(k)   DoD Instruction 5000.57, “Defense Acquisition University (DAU),” December 18, 2013,
      as amended
(l)   Title 10, United States Code
(m)   Title 41, United States Code
(n)   Title 31, United States Code
(o)   DoD Instruction 2200.01, “Combating Trafficking in Persons (CTIP),” June 21, 2019
(p)   DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 2, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
      DoD Public Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended




                                               6

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                   ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. PRESIDENT, DEFENSE ACQUISITION UNIVERSITY (DAU). Under the authority,
direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and in support of Enclosure 5 of this
instruction, the President, DAU:

   a. Supports the Principal Director of Defense Pricing and Contracting in the development,
maintenance, publication, and implementation of the DoD COR standard competency model.

  b. Develops and maintains the baseline COR-specific training curriculum aligned to the DoD
COR standard competency model.

   c. Provides online COR-specific training that conforms to Type A, B, and C standards.

  d. Provides a limited number of classroom offerings of COR-specific training within existing
DAU resources available for this purpose.

    e. Identifies DoD and commercial COR training resources, and assesses the availability of
training that conforms to Type A, B, and C standards.

    f. Provides a process for commercial training vendors and DoD Components to have its
training programs evaluated by an independent professional organization for equivalency to the
DoD COR-specific training curriculum in accordance with DoDI 5000.57 (Reference (k)).

    g. Qualifies and assists DoD Components that intend to offer the DoD COR-specific training
curriculum. Establishes qualification standards and approves the designation of the DoD
Component’s instructors to teach the DAU course(s).

    h. Provides supporting learning assets as appropriate, such as knowledge sharing, continuous
learning modules, rapid deployment training, mission support, and other means to support the
DoD COR standard.


2. DOD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

    a. Appoint general or flag officer, Senior Executive Service, or equivalent GS-15 rank senior
officials to oversee implementation of, and continued compliance with, this instruction for
identification, training, development, management, and certification of CORs.

   b. Designate a COR coordinator to provide functional advice to oversee, report, and
maintain as current and technically accurate the appropriate COR education, training, and

                                                7

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                     ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


experience, including competencies and content of the courses, and the COR management
program.

    c. Establish an appropriate COR management program that provides points of contact on
matters relating to COR education, training, and development. These points of contact will
advise all CORs on their COR education, training and development; and provide either the local
Judge Advocate General (JAG) office or the Office of General Counsel (OGC), immediately
upon the appointment of a COR designated as an OGE Form 450 filer, the COR’s name and date
of appointment, and annually by January 1st, a list of all CORs required to file OGE Form 450s.

    d. Mandate DoD Component-specific COR policies and procedures require that performance
of COR responsibilities are addressed in COR performance assessments.

    e. Develop policies and procedures for designation, training, development, management, and
certification of CORs consistent with this instruction.

    f. Develop policies and procedures that specify the roles, responsibilities, and authorities for
the various offices and individuals involved with COR performance.

   g. Develop procedures for identification, nomination, designation, and termination of CORs.

   h. Ensure that a qualified COR is designated for all contracts or orders placed for DoD
requirements, consistent with DoD policy, regardless of whether or not contract actions are
executed by a DoD or non-DoD contracting officer.

   i. Recommend funding levels in the annual budget submission to implement the training,
education, and other requirements of the DoD Component COR training, development,
management, and certification program.

    j. Ensure that the COR training, development, management, and certification program meets
or exceeds the basic requirements of the DoD standard for COR certification as described by this
instruction.

   k. Integrate the training, development, experience, and certification requirements of the DoD
Component COR program with personnel policies and procedures to ensure that CORs meet the
requirements of the DoD standard for COR certification and that performance of designated
COR responsibilities is addressed in annual performance assessments of the COR.

   l. Use both the JAM and SPM modules within the Procurement Integrated Enterprise
Environment (PIEE) suite of tools located at https://piee.eb.mil/piee-landing in accordance with
subpart 201.602-2 of Reference (g).




                                                 8

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                                          ENCLOSURE 3

                                          PROCEDURES


1. CONTRACTING OFFICER. The contracting officer:

   a. Determines the need for either a COR, or multiple or alternate CORs, to assist in technical
monitoring and contract oversight of a contract. The contracting officer also determines whether
a COR needs to file an OGE Form 450 based on the COR’s designated duties and responsibilities
and level of supervision and review.

        (1) If required, the contracting officer must notify the requiring activity of the need for a
COR(s) as referenced in paragraph 2 of this enclosure and paragraph 1 of Enclosure 4 of this
instruction. See Enclosure 6 of this instruction for examples of responsibilities that might be
designated to a COR. The designation of a COR for a specific contract, via letter of designation,
constitutes certification of that individual for performance of COR responsibilities under that
specific contract.

       (2) In designating CORs, the contracting officer should consider whether the person to
be designated is already performing COR duties and responsibilities on another contract (or
contracts).

        (3) Although there is no prohibition from performing COR duties on more than one
contract simultaneously, the contracting officer must ensure that individuals designated as CORs
are able to dedicate sufficient time to perform effective oversight on each designated contract.

           (a) The number of contracts for which a COR may be assigned is a matter for the
judgment of the contracting officer considering the size, scope, and complexity of the individual
contracts.

           (b) When an individual is designated as a COR for more than one contract (or more
than one task or delivery order under a contract), a letter of designation must be provided for
each contract (or task or delivery order).

       (4) The COR certification remains in effect until either the contract period of
performance ends or the COR is terminated by the contracting officer.

        (5) The contracting officer will not designate him or herself as a COR on a contract that
he or she awarded because, by default, the contracting officer is retaining all oversight
responsibilities for the contract.

    b. On receipt of a procurement request, reviews the requirement to determine if it requires
performance of supplies or services; and whether assistance in technical monitoring and contract
oversight of the anticipated contract is required or beneficial.

                                                  9

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


        (1) If a COR is required, identify by the type of standard (i.e., Type A, B, or C), the
duties, and responsibilities to be performed. The contracting officer advises the requiring
activity of the need for COR(s) support and the qualification requirements mandated by
Enclosure 5 of this instruction.

       (2) Consideration for multiple or alternate CORs include: multiple regions or remote
geographic locations of performance, contract complexity or performance risk, the need for
increased surveillance, or magnitude of the requirement.

   c. When applicable, designates a properly trained COR in writing within 3 business days of
award of all service contracts, including both firm-fixed-price and other than firm-fixed-price
contracts, and supply contracts with cost reimbursement line items in accordance with subpart
201.602-2 of Reference (g).

       (1) Contracting officers may waive COR specific initial and refresher training
requirements for COR nominees who have obtained a minimum of Level II “Certification in
Contracting” (1102 job series), “Industrial Property Management” (1103 job series), or “Quality
Assurance” (1910 job series), in accordance with sections 1701-1764 of Title 10, United States
Code, also known and referred to in this instruction as “The Defense Acquisition Workforce
Improvement Act (DAWIA)” (Reference (l)). New entrant and annual DoD Component
provided ethics training may not be waived. New entrant and refresher CTIP training in
accordance with Reference (o) may not be waived.

        (2) Contracts may cover delivery of both supplies and services. The contracting officer
will consider total delivery requirements of the contract when assessing whether the
requirements of Reference (g) apply.

       (3) The contracting officer will consider the limitations on delegating responsibilities to
a COR that have been delegated to a contract administration office (CAO) in accordance with
subparts 1.602-2 and 42.2 of Reference (e) and subpart 201.602-2 of Reference (f).

    d. On receipt of the COR nomination from the requiring activity, reviews the nomination to
determine if the COR nominee is qualified by education, training, and experience. Notifies the
requiring activity that the COR nominee is acceptable, or identifies deficiencies and request
additional nominations. The COR nomination, designation, and acceptance will be completed
through the JAM.

    e. Provides an orientation to the COR nominee to address the designated responsibilities, the
importance of performance, personal conflicts of interest and potential conflicts of interest,
informal commitments, unauthorized commitments, and the ethics expected in relationships with
the contracting officer, COR management, and the contractor.

  f. Notifies the contractor and CAO of the designation of responsibilities and limits of the
COR’s authority. A copy of the executed COR letter of designation should be provided to the
CAO.

                                                 10

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


    g. Ensures that the signed letter of designation is included in JAM and the COR’s
surveillance file within SPM.

   h. Reviews COR reports, files, and other documentation for completeness and
accomplishment of duties.

    i. Provides feedback on COR performance to the COR’s supervisor. If the COR’s reports
and performance are inadequate, discuss performance with the COR. If the reports and the
COR’s performance continue to be inadequate, discuss the COR’s performance with the
requiring activity or the COR’s management. If reports or performance continue to be
inadequate, notify both the COR and requiring activity or COR management that the COR
designation is (will be) terminated and request nominations for a replacement COR.

    j. Documents the termination of a COR designation due to transfer, retirement, or other
causes in writing. Notice of termination must be executed by the contracting officer,
acknowledged by the COR and COR management and posted in the JAM and SPM modules. In
addition, the termination notice must be provided to the COR Coordinator who will provide
notice to either the local JAG or OGC.


2. REQUIRING ACTIVITY OR COR MANAGEMENT. The requiring activity or COR
management:

    a. Ensures a COR is nominated as early in the acquisition cycle as practicable, before
contract award, to provide subject matter expertise during acquisition planning and contract
formation to ensure familiarity with the requirement, specific terms and conditions of the
resultant contract, and the responsibilities to be designated.

       (1) The size, scope, and complexity of the individual contract, or task or delivery order
under a contract, should be considered when an individual will be nominated and perform as a
COR on multiple contract actions. In these instances, alternate or multiple CORs should be
considered.

       (2) When an individual is nominated as a COR for more than one contract (or more than
one task or delivery order under a contract), a nomination is required for each contract, or task or
delivery order. However, a letter of designation signed by the contracting officer may reference
multiple order numbers.

   b. Ensures that a qualified COR is nominated for all contracts or orders placed for DoD
requirements, regardless of whether or not the contract actions are executed by a DoD or non-
DoD contracting officer.

  c. Discusses COR responsibilities to be designated and the importance of performance of
COR responsibilities with the COR nominee.

   d. Approves the COR nomination using JAM.
                                                11

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                       ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015



       (1) Determine that the COR nominee has no personal conflicts of interest with
performing the responsibilities to be designated. Conflicts of interest determinations are to be
reviewed again before contract award.

        (2) Unless DoD Component procedures require additional documentation, the
contracting officer will rely on the COR management determination that there are no personal
conflicts of interest.

    e. Ensures the COR nominee is registered as a)PIEE online user (located at
https://piee.eb.mil/piee-landing).

   f. Ensures the COR nominee has the necessary clearance for the contract.

     g. Ensures the COR nominee has completed an OGE Form 450 within the time periods
specified in section 2634.903 of Reference (h) and section 7-303 of reference (i) for new entrant
filers. The contracting officer decides if a COR needs to file an OGE Form 450 based on the
COR’s designated duties and responsibilities and level of supervision and review.

    h. Ensures the COR nominee understands the requirement to complete a yearly
administrative review of COR files with the contracting officer in the anniversary month of their
designation.

    i. Ensures the COR nominee understands that he or she may be held personally and
financially liable for unauthorized acts.

    j. Ensures the COR nominee is provided and completes all required annual training along
with any additional training mandated by the contracting activity in accordance with Enclosure 5
of this instruction.

    k. Ensures the COR nominee is provided and completes the COR specific refresher training
as required every 3 years in accordance with Enclosure 5 of this instruction.

    l. Ensures adequate resources (e.g., time, supplies, equipment, opportunity) are available for
performance of COR responsibilities before contract award.

    m. Incorporates performance of COR responsibilities into COR nominee’s performance
objectives for either their annual performance appraisal or performance assessment. The
supervisor evaluates the performance of COR responsibilities as part of the COR’s individual
performance appraisal or performance assessment throughout the period of the contract; and is
required to solicit input on performance of COR responsibilities from the contracting activity.

  n. Neither delegates nor re-delegates any COR responsibilities that were designated to the
COR by the contracting officer.

   o. If a COR is terminated before the contract performance ends, nominates a qualified
                                                12

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


successor COR who must be trained and designated specific responsibilities by the contracting
officer before he or she assumes those responsibilities. The nomination should be completed as
timely as possible to avoid or minimize any lapse of contract surveillance.

       (1) Only the requiring activity or COR supervisor may request termination of a COR to
the contracting officer and nominate a qualified successor COR if needed, unless COR
performance is determined inadequate by the contracting officer.

        (2) If notified by a contracting officer that COR performance is inadequate, the requiring
activity or COR management, including the COR supervisor, must re-emphasize with the COR
the importance of the COR function and responsibilities. The requiring activity or COR
management should notify the contracting officer of these completed actions.

        (3) If notified by a contracting officer that COR performance remains inadequate and
that the letter of designation will be terminated, take action to identify and nominate a
replacement COR. Deficient performance by the terminated COR should also be addressed in
either the COR’s annual performance appraisal or performance assessment.

        (4) Ensure that the terminated COR submits all reports, as required by the contracting
officer; records; and the COR files to the COR management or successor COR, as appropriate.


3. COR NOMINEE OR COR. The COR nominee or COR:

   a. Completes the OGE Form 450 when designated as a filer by the contracting officer. The
COR must submit the completed OGE Form 450 directly to his or her supervisor through the
contracting officer for review.

   b. Completes the required COR training or refresher training before contract award as
described in Enclosure 5, unless waived in accordance with paragraph 6 of Enclosure 5.

   c. Participates, as appropriate, in pre-award activities such as requirements definition,
acquisition planning, and contract formation processes.

    d. Establishes and maintains individual COR files for each contract in accordance with
subpart 201.602-2 of Reference (g) and DoD Component procedures. COR files will be
available for review by the contracting officer, internal review officials, or other officials as
authorized by the contracting officer.

  e. Reviews and understands those contract terms and conditions that apply to their assigned
COR duties and responsibilities.

  f. Neither delegates nor re-delegates any COR responsibilities that were delegated to the
COR by the contracting officer.



                                                  13

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


   g. Neither misrepresents the limits of their authority in dealings with the contractor nor takes
any action which may constitute, or appear to constitute, an informal agreement or unauthorized
commitment. A COR may be held personally and financially liable for unauthorized acts.

    h. Provides input on accomplishment of COR responsibilities for either their annual
performance appraisal or performance assessment.

    i. Provides reports on contract performance to the contracting officer using the SPM module.
If advised by the contracting officer that the reports are inadequate, ensure revised reports
address inadequate issues and are determined adequate by the contracting officer.

    j. When advised by the contracting officer or COR management that the COR designation
will be terminated, ensures all reports, records, and communications are made available to
management, the successor COR, and the contracting officer.

    k. Requests relief from the COR designation through the COR supervisor and management
in advance of prolonged non-COR related temporary duty, reassignment or separation from the
U.S. Government to permit the requiring activity adequate time to select, train and nominate a
qualified successor COR.




                                                14

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 4

                                   COR DOCUMENTATION


1. COR NOMINATION

    a. The request for a COR nomination and completing the nomination is a collaborative effort
among the COR, the requiring activity, or COR management, and the contracting officer. It
must be completed as early in the acquisition process as possible to allow COR participation in
pre-award activities. In all cases, the COR nomination must be submitted before contract award.

   b. The contracting officer may request the following from the appropriate official in the
requiring activity when a COR is nominated:

       (1) A procurement request number, solicitation number, or contract number.

       (2) The type of standard (i.e., Type A, B, or C), responsibilities identified for COR
performance, and qualifications, such as training and experience (i.e., agency and technical), in
accordance with Enclosure 5 of this instruction.

       (3) The anticipated period of performance of COR responsibilities.

       (4) Whether the COR nominee will participate in pre-award activities.

       (5) A deadline for receipt of the COR nomination.

       (6) The necessary security clearance the COR nominee must have for the contract.

       (7) Whether the COR will be designated as an OGE Form 450 filer.

        (8) If there will be a recommendation to waive agency experience requirements, the
basis for the waiver must be addressed and included in the COR nomination.

    c. The requiring activity or COR management will be provided access to PIEE to complete
and approve the nomination. The COR nominee must have a PIEE account and the SPM COR
role to complete the nomination.. If the contracting officer requires access to the contractor
performance assessment reporting system (CPARS), the synchronized pre-deployment and
operational tracker (SPOT), an account would be required after COR designation.


2. COR LETTER OF DESIGNATION VIA JAM. The DoD Components will use the PIEE
website to access the JAM (located at https:// piee.eb.mil/piee-landing) to ensure the COR
nominee, COR supervisor, contract specialist, and the contracting officer complete the following
tasks.

                                                15

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                    DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


   a. The COR letter of designation from the contracting officer must:

       (1) Identify the COR by name and position.

       (2) Identify the contractor and contract number, including task or delivery order number,
and date of award.

       (3) Specify that the designation is pursuant to the authority in subpart 1.602-2 of
Reference (e).

       (4) Specify the extent of the COR’s authority to act on behalf of the contracting officer,
such as specific roles and responsibilities designated to the COR.

       (5) Specify the limitations on the COR’s authority.

       (6) Identify the period covered by the designation.

       (7) Specify the authority is not re-delegable, and cannot be re-designated or transferred.

       (8) Specify the COR may be personally and financially liable for unauthorized acts.

       (9) Address standards of conduct and personal conflicts of interest, either real or
apparent.

        (10) Certify the COR meets the qualification requirements established in this instruction
for the specific type of standard.

        (11) Stipulate whether the COR will be a departmental accountable official (DAO). The
COR will be a DAO if their responsibilities include providing information, data, or services that
are directly relied on by the certifying official in the certification of vouchers for payment (i.e.,
public vouchers on a cost reimbursement contract).

        (12) Specify the COR is responsible for notifying COR management and the contracting
officer if unable to continue performance as the COR.

       (13) Where applicable, specify that the COR must file an OGE Form 450.

   b. The letter of designation to the COR must be signed by the contracting officer, COR
management, and the COR. The original executed letter of designation will be retained in JAM.
A copy of the letter of designation will be maintained in the COR surveillance file in the SPM
module for access by the COR and COR management.

  c. The contracting officer will provide a copy of the executed letter of designation to the
CAO, quality assurance activity, and property administration activity, if applicable.



                                                 16

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                        ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                     DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


    d. The executed letter of designation constitutes certification for performance of COR
responsibilities for the time period specified under the specific contract, task, or delivery order.

   e. The executed letter of designation and the effective dates are included in the JAM and
viewable in the SPM modules.


3. TERMINATING THE LETTER OF DESIGNATION

   a. The letter terminating a COR’s designation must identify and address:

       (1) The COR by name and position.

       (2) The contractor and contract number, including task or delivery order number.

       (3) Date of termination.

       (4) Reason for termination (e.g., end of contract performance, COR performance issues).

    b. The letter terminating a COR’s designation, regardless of cause or timing, must be
executed by the contracting officer and acknowledged by COR management and the COR.
Copies of the notice and letter of designation for the successor COR will have the same
distribution requirements as the COR letter of designation.

    c. When terminating a COR, the contracting officer must conduct terminations in the JAM.
The termination letter will be made available to all successor CORs in the SPM module.
Successor CORs will include copies of termination letters of earlier CORs in the COR
surveillance file if the termination reason is other than contract completion.


4. JAM AND SPM MODULES. All COR nominations, designations, and terminations will be
conducted in JAM and be viewable in the SPM module. All other contract surveillance actions
will be conducted in the SPM module (e.g. submission of COR reports, annual inspection,
contract surveillance). Both modules are located in the PIEE located at https://piee.eb.mil/piee-
landing.

   a. JAM:

       (1) Centralizes all procurement related appointments in one module.

      (2) Allows the COR nomination and appointment process to be initiated by either the
COR, the contracting officer or the contract specialist.

      (3) Allows identification of current CORs, COR supervisors, and contracting officers by
name and by other contact information.

                                                 17

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                         ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                   DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


        (4) Identifies all training completed by the COR, including basic, annual, and refresher
training(s).

       (5) Allows review of the status of all COR nominations.

        (6) Tracks CORs by individual contract numbers, or task or delivery order numbers to
identify all CORs, where there may be multiple or alternate CORs.

       (7) Generates and provides digitally signed letters of designation and termination.

        (8) Identifies contracts with CORs designated, CORs terminated, contracts retained for
surveillance by the contracting officer, and contracts eligible for a designation, but no assigned
COR. Allows for recording of these actions.

       (9) Allows for electronic distribution of signed letters of designation and termination

   b. SPM Module

        (1) Provides contracting and COR personnel a web-based portal for all relevant COR
actions.

       (2) Provides an online COR surveillance file for all COR actions.

        (3) Provides user access to standardized forms for recurring submission of contract
surveillance documentation such as COR trip reports, correspondence, status reports, and other
miscellaneous documents.

      (4) Allows COR management to review the COR surveillance and monitoring activities
when evaluating COR performance.




                                                18

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                       ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                    DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 5

                       QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR CORS


1. TRAINING REQUIREMENTS. The following training requirements are considered the
minimum training necessary for performance as a COR. DoD Components may add to these
minimum requirements, as appropriate. Training requirements for the COR are directly related
to the type of standards for the contract, work or requirement to be performed, and the dollar
value and complexity of the effort. DAU is responsible for implementing learning assets that
match the COR competencies for Types A, B, and C training as identified in section 4 of this
enclosure. Detailed descriptions and access to these courses are available from the DAU Catalog
located at: http://icatalog.dau. edu/.

    a. Minimum required Type A training, as described in Enclosure 5 and Table 2 of Enclosure
6 of this instruction, consists of:

        (1) DAU course, “Contracting Officer’s Representative with a Mission Focus,” available
online. Satisfactory completion of the minimum requirements for Type B or C COR training
satisfies this requirement for Type A training.

        (2) DAU course, “COR in a Contingency Environment,” available either in classroom or
online, is mandatory for CORs supporting contingency operations in a contingency environment.

      (3) DoD Component provided new entrant and annual ethics training (designated OGE
Form 450 filers only), and new entrant and refresher CTIP training in accordance with Reference
(o). More information on CTIP training can be found at https://ctip.defense.gov.

        (4) Any additional training mandated by the contracting activity or agency, such as
electronic document access (EDA), contract changes, security, etc.

       (5) Contract-specific orientation provided by the contracting officer.

    b. Minimum required Type B training, as described in Enclosure 5 and Table 3 of Enclosure
6 of this instruction, in addition to the requirements stated in paragraphs 1a(2), 1a(3), 1a(4), and
1a(6), consist of:

       (1) DAU course, “Contracting Officer’s Representative Course”, available either in
classroom or online, or an equivalent course designed to promote the competencies for CORs on
such requirements.

       (2) Any additional training mandated by the contracting activity or agency (e.g., EDA,
contract changes, contract incentives, procurement fraud, safety, security.).



                                                 19

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                       ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                   DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


    c. Type C training, in addition to the requirements stated in paragraph 1b, will include
supplemental specific training requirements, as described in Table 4 of Enclosure 6 of this
instruction.

    d. DoD Component-sponsored or commercially available Type B or C training must be
determined to be equivalent to DAU courses and learning assets. A list of equivalent courses can
be identified by checking the DAU Website at https://icatalog.dau.edu/appg.aspx. In order to
meet the training standard, training providers must provide equivalent training to the DAU
baseline in order to meet COR standard. The equivalency process is discussed on the DAU
Website at http://icatalog.dau. edu/learning/equivalency.aspx.

    e. Additional training for CORs required by DoD Components may supplement, but will not
replace the training requirements provided in paragraphs 1a, 1b and 1c of this enclosure.

        (1) COR nominees participating in pre-award activities, such as acquisition planning and
contract formation are encouraged to obtain the knowledge necessary to perform in the phases of
acquisition through completion of DAU continuous learning modules or through other sources
that provide an overview of the acquisition process, procedures, contract classification,
performance-based services acquisition, contract types, proper file documentation, contract
modifications, and contract management.

     (2) Selection of courses will be based on specifics of the requirement and preferences of
COR management and the contracting activity.

       (3) A complete list of DAU continuous learning modules is available in the DAU
iCatalog located on the DAU Website at http://icatalog.dau.edu/appg.aspx.

    f. The COR is required to perform ancillary duties and responsibilities by the requiring
activity or COR management. These duties (e.g., CPARS, ensuring contractor reporting in the
SPOT may or may not be designated by the contracting officer. These ancillary duties or
responsibilities may require training, and obtaining access to systems (e.g., CPARS, SPOT. The
COR nominee, or COR, once designated, must work with COR management to ensure that
required training and access, etc. are obtained before he or she undertakes these responsibilities.


2. AGENCY EXPERIENCE

   a. The agency experience for Type A standard is 6 months.

   b. The agency experience for Type B standard is 12 months.

   c. The agency experience for Type C standard is 12 months.

   d. Experience for Types A, B, or C standards may be recommended for waiver by COR
management, but the basis for the waiver must be addressed in the COR nomination package.

                                                20

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                       ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                   DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


The contracting officer, at the request of COR management, may waive agency experience
requirements.


3. RELEVANT TECHNICAL EXPERIENCE. Relevant technical experience for a COR is
knowledge or practical experience in technical, professional, or administrative fields that is
commensurate with the responsibilities that will be designated to the COR under a specific
contract. Relevant technical experience is generally acquired through education, job
performance, or direct hands-on training (e.g., while in a trainee or intern developmental
position).


4. COMPETENCIES. Competencies for a COR may be acquired or developed through a
combination of formal education, training, and experience.

   a. Competencies for Type A standards are:

       (1) Attention to detail.

       (2) Decision making ability.

       (3) Flexibility.

       (4) Oral and written communication skills.

       (5) Problem solving and reasoning.

       (6) Self-management and initiative.

       (7) Teamwork.

       (8) Business ethics.

       (9) Effective communication of contract requirements.

       (10) Effective contract performance management.

       (11) Effective COR performance.

    b. Competencies for Types B and C standards include the Type A competencies in paragraph
4a of this enclosure, as well as:

       (1) Influencing and persuasive interpersonal skills.

       (2) Planning and evaluating.

                                                21

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                  DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


         (3) Defining government requirements.

         (4) Understanding and knowledge of contract type.

         (5) Effective analytic skills.

         (6) Project management.

         (7) Strategic planning.

         (8) Understanding the marketplace.


5. REFRESHER TRAINING. Refresher training requirements are considered the minimum
necessary for continued performance as a COR. Refresher training is in addition to the training
requirements in paragraph 1 above. DoD Components and contracting activities have the
authority to require additional or more frequent refresher training.

   a. Refresher training for standard Type A CORs, in addition to training mandated by the
contracting activity, includes:

         (1) Mandatory annual activity provided ethics training (designated OGE Form 450 filers
only).

         (2) “CTIP” training is required every 3 years in accordance with Reference (o).

        (3) A minimum of 8 hours of COR-specific training required every 3 years, or before
assuming COR responsibility, if the individual has not performed COR responsibilities within
the previous 24 months. Contracting offices will determine what the COR-specific refresher
training course requirements should be commensurate with the contract work being performed.

    b. Refresher training for standard Types B and C CORs, in addition to training mandated by
the activity, includes:

         (1) Mandatory annual activity provided ethics training (designated OGE Form 450 filers
only).

         (2) “CTIP” training is required every 3 years in accordance with Reference (o).

       (3) A minimum of 16 hours of COR-specific training required every 3 years, or before
assuming COR responsibility if the individual has not performed COR responsibilities within the
previous 24 months. Contracting offices will determine what the COR-specific refresher training
course requirements should be commensurate with the contract work being performed.

   c. A current certificate of training completion.

                                                 22

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                 DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015



6. WAIVER OF TRAINING. The contracting officer, at the request of COR management and
requiring activity, may waive some COR training requirements and designate COR
responsibilities when necessary for continuation of services. However, COR management is
responsible for ensuring that any COR performing under such waiver completes all required
training. New entrant and annual ethics training consistent with subpart G of part 2638 of
Reference (h) cannot be waived. New entrant and CTIP training, in accordance with Reference
(o), cannot be waived.

    a. Standard Type A CORs must complete training within 21 days of COR designation,
unless another specific timeframe is agreed to by the contracting officer. Standard Types B and
C CORs must complete training within 35 days of COR designation, unless another specific
timeframe is agreed to by the contracting officer.

   b. Verification of the training completion must occur within 7 days after completing training.

   c. Failure to complete and document the required training within the times prescribed above
may result in termination of COR designation.




                                               23

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                    ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                                DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                                                   ENCLOSURE 6

              EXAMPLES OF COR RESPONSIBILITIES AND COR CERTIFICATION
                                REQUIREMENTS

Examples of responsibilities that might be designated to a COR are listed in Table 1 in this
enclosure. Minimum requirements for Types A, B, and C training are described in Tables 2, 3,
and 4, respectively.

                               Table 1. Examples of COR Responsibilities

  1. Complete the OGE Form 450 (if designated as a filer by the contracting officer) and other DoD Component-
  directed documentation. The contracting officer will accept the certification of the COR management stating
  that there are no personal conflicts of interest unless DoD Component procedures require additional
  documentation.
  2. Participate, as appropriate, in pre-award requirements definition, acquisition planning, and contract formation
  processes (i.e. market research, independent government estimate, justification and approval documentation).
  3. Establish and maintain a COR surveillance file in the SPM module and in accordance with agency or DoD
  Component procedures. The COR file will, at a minimum and as applicable based on responsibilities
  designated, include copies of:
      (a) COR letter of designation from the contracting officer.
      (b) Signed contract and modifications (unless available in EDA).
      (c) Quality assurance surveillance plan or other performance surveillance plan.
      (d) Written communications with the contractor and the contracting officer.
      (e) Trip reports.
      (f) Documentation of telephone conversations and meetings with the contractor and the contracting officer.
      (g) Surveillance documents.
      (h) Invoice and payment documentation (unless avalable in WAWF).
      (i) Documentation required to record, evaluate, and report contractor’s performance.
  4. Ensure the necessary requirements are met for contractor background checks and all other required security
  clearances (if applicable).
  5. Maintain liaison and direct communications with the contractor, contracting officer, COR management and
  other authorized representatives related to the contract or project.
  6. Participate in meetings and discussions as requested by the contracting officer (e.g. post-award orientation
  conferences, negotiations).
  7. Assure the changes in work under a contract are not implemented before written authorization or a contract
  modification is issued by the contracting officer.
  8. If authorized, recommend changes in scope or technical provisions of the contract, order, or agreement with
  written justification for the proposed action to the contracting officer.
  9. Provide clarification of technical requirements to the contractor, as necessary, without making changes or
  agreeing to make changes to the contract, task or delivery order, or agreement.
  10. Coordinate with the contractor and contracting officer to resolve issues and monitor corrective actions.
  11. Do not direct or supervise contractor employees, interfere with the manner in which the contractor assigns
  work, or interfere with the contractor’s relations with organized labor.
  12. Assist the contracting officer with close-out of contracts, orders, or agreements, especially with the orderly
  transition or completion of work as contractor work effort is phased out.



                                                         24

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                                     ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                               DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                        Table 1. Examples of COR Responsibilities, Continued

  13. Ensure COR surveillance files are available to the contracting officer during contract close-out.
  14. Serve as the central point of contact to assure that any government obligations stated in the solicitation are
  completed (e.g., government furnished property is in place, submittals are reviewed for approval, plans or
  procedures required by the performance work statement are obtained).
  15. If COR designation is terminated before the contract is completed, ensure that all relevant information for
  the contract is turned over to the new COR, once he or she is designated.
  16. Refer any request from a contractor for the release of information to the contracting officer.
  17. Review contractor quality control plans and recommend changes or acceptance to the contracting officer.
  18. Ensure contractors comply with procedures on making restrictive markings on data, if applicable.
  19. Recognize and report organizational conflicts of interest to the contracting officer.
  20. Monitor contractor compliance with safety (i.e., Occupational Safety & Health Administration), security,
  labor (i.e., 351-357 of Title 41, United States Code, also known as “Service Contract Act of 1965” (Reference
  (m)), and environmental law and regulatory requirements, as applicable.
  21. Ensure all contractors that were Sensitive Compartmented Information indoctrinated are debriefed and
  reported to the cognizant security office.
  22. Assist the contracting officer in negotiating any proposed increases or decreases in scope of work by
  providing independent cost estimates and technical evaluations on request.
  23. Monitor contractor performance and ensure that the contractor performs the requirements of the contract or
  order or agreement in accordance with the terms, conditions, and specifications. This includes ensuring that all
  required items, documentation, data, and reports are properly and timely submitted as contractually required.
  24. For a performance-based services contract, order, or agreement, perform on-site surveillance in accordance
  with the QASP or performance assessment plan, as applicable. Assure technical proficiency and compliance
  with the technical provisions of the contract or order or agreement by reviewing and verifying the performance
  of work accomplished by the contractor.
  25. Notify the contractor of deficiencies observed during surveillance (e.g., anticipated performance failures,
  late deliveries, non-conforming work, security violations, hazardous working conditions, improper use of
  government material) and recommend appropriate action to the contracting officer to effect correction, as
  applicable.
  26. Review contractor requests for travel, overtime, government assets, or subcontracting, in a timely manner,
  and forward to the contracting officer for approval.
  27. Review and analyze the contractor’s deliverables, service, and management reports.
  28. Monitor and track contract obligations and expenditures per accounting classification reference number and
  contract line item numbers for each contract or order or agreement.
  29. Monitor fund limitations and expenditures on cost reimbursement, time and materials (T&M) and labor-
  hour (LH) contracts. Only the contracting officer can make changes to the contract or order or agreement.
  30. Under T&M and LH contracts, assure that the contractor uses the appropriate level of qualified personnel as
  specified in the contract, order, or agreement.
  31. Provide input on contractor performance to the award fee board.
  32. Ensure contracting officer is notified by the contractor of any anticipated cost overruns or under runs for
  cost reimbursement contracts.
  33. Inspect deliverables and monitor services for conformance with terms and conditions. Accept or reject the
  deliverables or services. Ensure compliance and completion by the contractor of all required operations,
  including the preparation of the DD Forms 250 (250-1) “Material Inspection and Receiving Reports,” or
  equivalent, which will be authenticated and certified by the COR that the services and supplies have been
  received and are acceptable. Process inspection report through the WAWF as supporting documentation for
  payment.


                                                        25

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                                    ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                               DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                        Table 1. Examples of COR Responsibilities, Continued

  34. Document inspections performed including disposition of the results.
  35. Report to the contracting officer on contract completion or final delivery.
  36. Adhere to the invoice and payment clause in the contract.
  37. Review interim invoices (e.g. cost reimbursement, T&M and LH contracts) to make sure charges are
  commensurate with observed performance (i.e., travel was necessary and actually occurred, labor hours charged
  are commensurate with level of work performed). Pursuant to section 242.803(b) of Reference (f), the contract
  auditor (Defense Contract Audit Agency (DCAA)) is the authorized representative of the contracting officer for
  approving interim vouchers for payment under DoD cost-reimbursement, T&M and LH contracts. Coordinate
  issues of cost with DCAA (through contracting officer) who is authorized to approve these invoices.
  38. Report any discrepancies in invoices to the contracting officer and provide documentation to support the
  representation.
  39. Review and approve invoices for fixed-price deliverables.
  40. Process payment requests in a timely manner in accordance with chapter 39 of Title 31, United States Code,
  also known as “The Prompt Payment Act” (Reference (n)).
  41. Coordinate and provide any government-owned (or leased) assets or use of U.S. Government space to the
  contractor as required by the contract.
  42. Monitor the control and disposition of any government-furnished assets. Ensure the completion of all
  required documentation for the acceptance, use, and return of government-furnished assets, including unique
  identification tracking.
  43. Provide to the contracting officer an assessment of any loss, damage, or destruction of U.S. Government
  property.
  44. Perform joint equipment inventories with the contractor at award, annually, and at close-out.
  45. Monitor contractor’s performance measurement program, ensuring compliance with earned value
  management and cost performance reporting.
  46. Evaluate, for adequacy, the contractor’s engineering efforts and management systems that relate to design,
  development, production, engineering changes, subcontractors, tests, management of engineering resources,
  reliability and maintainability, data control systems, configuration management, and independent research and
  development. Evaluation of configuration management processes is the duty of the cognizant configuration
  manager.
  47. Conduct reviews of value engineering change proposals.
  48. Discuss and coordinate with the contractor’s representatives concerning clarification of drawings,
  specifications and performance parameters.
  49. Understand local culture, operating environment, and how it may affect behavior, perspective and the
  ability to function as a COR.
  50. Be aware of and report potential instances of bribery, kickbacks, and other illegal acts to the contracting
  officer and the appropriate investigative office.
  51. Understand rules of engagement within deployed area of responsibility.
  52. Determine the items to be included (i.e., government equipment and facilities) in the letters of authorization
  for contracting officer approval.
  53. Develop and update a continuity file for turnover to a new COR.
  54. Consult with the local installation safety office on contractor’s operation or activity as needed
  55. Participate in any specialized contingency training before or during mobilization.
  56. Ensure the contractor complies with all notification requirements and safety procedures at the occurrence of
  a hazardous event.
  57. For any hazardous event, immediately notify the appropriate officials, and then notify the contracting
  officer.


                                                        26

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                                    ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                          DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015


                       Table 1. Examples of COR Responsibilities, Continued

  58. Complete all required hazardous material handling training.
  59. Document contractor performance in the CPARS.
  60. Maintain surveillance over contractor compliance with CTIP requirements.




                                                     27

Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                             ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                                                                                          DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015
                                                   Table 2. DoD Standard for Certification of CORs – Type A

NATURE OF TYPE A: WORK                    REQUIRED COMPETENCY                       REQUIRED COMPETENCIES                                 EXPERIENCE AND TRAINING
   OR REQUIREMENT                                TOPICS                                                                                        REQUIREMENTS

Fixed-price contracts without           General:                           On completion of mandatory training, the COR should Experience:
incentives and low performance risk.    • Attention to detail              be able to perform at least these competencies in a       • Agency experience: Minimum of 6 months
                                        • Decision making                  manner consistent with the nature of Type A work or          unless waived. The waiver must be
Attributes of such requirements might   • Flexibility                      requirements:                                                addressed in the nomination.
include:                                • Oral and written communication                                                             • Relevant technical experience: As
• Lack of technical or                  • Problem solving and reasoning    •    Assist in acquisition planning.                         determined by the requiring activity and
    administrative complexity           • Self-management and initiative   •    Assist in contract award process.                       COR Management for the contracting
• No identifiable risk factors          • Teamwork                         •    Establish and maintain a COR file with all              officer’s consideration.
• Limited requirement for technical                                             required documentation.                              • General competencies: As determined by
    expertise                           Technical:                         •    Identify and prevent unethical conduct and              the nominating supervisor for the
• Low likelihood of modification        • Business ethics                       instances of fraud, waste and abuse.                    contracting officer’s consideration.
• Effort is a follow-on to an           • Effective communication of       •    Perform technical and administrative contract
    existing contract                      contract requirements                surveillance and reporting responsibilities in        Training:
                                        • Effective contract performance        accordance with the letter of designation and        • DAU course, “Contracting Officer’s
COR responsibilities are generally         management                           surveillance plan.                                      Representative with a Mission Focus”
limited to minimal technical and        • Effective COR performance        •    Recommend contract changes when necessary               (online).
administrative contract surveillance.                                           and monitor contract performance as modified.        • DAU course, “COR in a Contingency
                                                                           •    Monitor contract expenditures and payments.             Environment,” when applicable (classroom
                                                                           •    Monitor contract schedule compliance.                   or online).
                                                                           •    Perform liaison responsibilities between the         • DoD Component provided new entrant and
                                                                                contracting officer, the requiring activity, and the    annual ethics (designated OGE Form 450
                                                                                contractor for management of the contract.              filers only) & CTIP training.
                                                                           •    Inspect and accept or reject deliverables during     • Additional training mandated by the
                                                                                contract performance and at close-out in                contracting activity or agency (e.g., safety,
                                                                                conformance with contract terms and conditions.         security.).
                                                                           •    Monitor the control and disposition of U.S.
                                                                                Government furnished assets.                          Refresher Training:
                                                                           •    Perform surveillance in a contingency                • Minimum of 8 hours COR specific training:
                                                                                environment, when applicable.                           o Every 3 years, OR
                                                                                                                                        o Before assuming COR responsibilities,
                                                                                                                                             if the individual has not served as a
                                                                                                                                             COR within the previous 24 months.
                                                                                                                                     • Annual DoD Component provided ethics
                                                                                                                                        (designated OGE Form 450 filers only.
                                                                                                                                     • CTIP training every 3 years
                                                                                                                                     • Any additional training mandated by the
                                                                                                                                        contracting activity or agency.




                                                                                    28
Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                                                                                                         ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                                                                                          DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015
                                                     Table 3. DoD Standard for Certification of CORs – Type B

NATURE OF TYPE B: WORK                     REQUIRED COMPETENCY                       REQUIRED COMPETENCIES                                EXPERIENCE AND TRAINING
   OR REQUIREMENT                                 TOPICS                                                                                       REQUIREMENTS

Fixed-price contracts with incentives;   General:                           On completion of mandatory training, the COR should Experience:
fixed-price contracts with other than    • Attention to detail              be able to perform at least these competencies in a     • Agency experience: Minimum of 12 months
low performance risk; and other than     • Decision making                  manner consistent with the nature of Type B work or         unless waived. The waiver must be
fixed-price contracts. This includes     • Flexibility                      requirements:                                               addressed in the nomination package.
everything other than Types A and C.     • Influencing and persuasive       •    Assist in acquisition planning.                    • Relevant technical experience: As
                                            interpersonal skills            •    Assist in contract award process.                      determined by the requiring activity or COR
Attributes of such requirements might    • Oral and written communication   •    Establish and maintain COR file with all required      management for the contracting officer’s
include:                                 • Planning and evaluating               documentation.                                         consideration.
• Contract complexity or                 • Problem solving                  •    Identify and prevent unethical conduct and         • General competencies: As determined by the
    performance risk                                                                                                                    nominating supervisor for the contracting
                                         • Reasoning                             instances of fraud, waste and abuse.
• Effort will be performed in                                               •                                                           officer’s consideration.
                                         • Self-management and initiative        Review technical deliverables and ensure
    multiple regions or remote                                                   compliance with Statement of Work or Statement
                                         • Teamwork
    geographic locations                                                         of Objectives (e.g., perform technical monitoring  Training:
• The need for increased                                                         and reporting in accordance with a quality         • DAU course, “Contracting Officer’s
    surveillance                                                                 assurance surveillance plan or other quality           Representative” (classroom or on-line) or
                                         Technical:
• Magnitude of the requirement                                                   surveillance plan).                                    ALU-CL or equivalent course.
                                         • Business ethics
• The contract contains incentive        • Defining government              •    Perform administrative monitoring and reporting    • DAU course, “COR in a Contingency
    arrangements or cost sharing            requirements                         responsibilities (e.g., handle security issues,        Environment,” when applicable (classroom
    provisions                                                                   attend meetings.).                                     or online).
                                         • Understanding and knowledge of
• The contract is cost-type of T&M          contract type                   •    Recommend contract changes when necessary          • DoD Component provided new entrant and
    or LH type, or FP LOE                                                        and monitor contract performance as modified.          annual ethics (designated OGE Form 450
                                         • Effective analytic skills
                                                                            •    Monitor contract expenditures and payments.            filers only) & CTIP training.
                                         • Effective communication of
COR responsibilities are of increased                                       •    Monitor contract schedule compliance.              • Additional training mandated by the
                                            contract requirements
complexity.
                                         • Effective contract performance   •    Perform liaison responsibilities between the           contracting activity or agency (e.g., safety,
                                                                                 contracting officer and the contractor for             security.).
                                            management
                                         • Effective COR performance             management of the contract.
                                                                            •    Inspect, and accept or reject deliverables during  Refresher Training:
                                         • Project management                                                                       • Minimum of 16 hours COR specific training:
                                                                                 contract performance and at close-out in
                                         • Strategic planning                                                                           o Every 3 years, OR
                                                                                 conformance with contract terms and conditions.
                                         • Understanding the marketplace
                                                                            •    Review and validate that contractor payment            o Before assuming COR responsibilities, if
                                                                                 requests are commensurate with performance.                 the individual has not served as a COR
                                                                            •    Monitor control and disposition of U.S                      within the previous 24 months.
                                                                                 Government furnished assets.                      • Annual DoD Component provided ethics
                                                                            •    Perform surveillance in a contingency                (designated OGE Form 450 filers only) CTIP
                                                                                 environment, when applicable.                        training every 3 years
                                                                                                                                   • CTIP training every 3 years
                                                                                                                                    • Any additional training mandated by the
                                                                                                                                        contracting activity or agency.




                                                                                      29
 Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                                                                                                        ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                                                                                          DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015
                                                    Table 4. DoD Standard for Certification of CORs – Type C

NATURE OF TYPE C: WORK                    REQUIRED COMPETENCY                       REQUIRED COMPETENCIES                                 EXPERIENCE AND TRAINING
   OR REQUIREMENT                                TOPICS                                                                                        REQUIREMENTS

Unique contract requirements that       General:                           On completion of mandatory training, COR should be        Experience:
necessitate the COR have a higher       • Attention to detail              able to perform at least these competencies in a          • Agency experience: Minimum of 12 months
education or specialized training       • Decision making                  manner consistent with the nature of Type C work or          unless waived. The waiver must be
beyond the Type B requirements.         • Flexibility                      requirements:                                                addressed in nomination package.
                                        • Influencing and persuasive       •    Assist in acquisition planning.                      • Relevant technical experience: As
Attributes of such requirements might      Interpersonal skills            •    Assist in contract award process.                       determined by the requiring activity or COR
include:                                • Oral and written communication   •    Establish and maintain COR file with all required       management for the contracting officer’s
• Environmental remediation             • Planning and evaluating               documentation.                                          consideration.
• Major weapons systems                 • Problem solving                  •    Identify and prevent unethical conduct and           • General competencies: As determined by the
• Medical or dental or veterinarian     • Reasoning                             instances of fraud, waste and abuse.                    nominating supervisor for the contracting
    services, etc.                      • Self-management and initiative   •    Review technical deliverables and ensure                officer’s consideration.
                                        • Teamwork                              compliance with Statement of Work or Statement
COR responsibilities are of increased                                           of Objectives (e.g., perform technical monitoring    Training:
complexity.                                                                     and reporting in accordance with a quality           • DAU course, “Contracting Officer’s
                                        Technical:                              assurance surveillance plan or other quality            Representative” (classroom or on-line) or
                                                                                surveillance plan).                                     ALU-CL or equivalent course.
                                        • Business ethics
                                        • Defining government              •    Perform administrative monitoring and reporting      • DAU course “COR in a Contingency
                                           requirements                         responsibilities (e.g., handle security issues,         Environment,” when applicable (classroom
                                                                                attend meeting.).                                       or online).
                                        • Understanding and knowledge of
                                           contract type                   •    Recommend contract changes when necessary            • DoD Component provided new entrant and
                                                                                and monitor contract performance as modified.           annual ethics (designated OGE Form 450
                                        • Effective analytic skills
                                                                           •    Monitor contract expenditures.                          filers only) & CTIP training.
                                        • Effective communication of
                                                                           •    Monitor contract schedule compliance.                • Additional training mandated by the
                                           contract requirements
                                        • Effective contract performance   •    Perform liaison responsibilities between the            contracting activity or agency (e.g., safety,
                                                                                contracting officer and the contractor for              security.).
                                           management
                                        • Effective COR performance             management of the contract.
                                                                           •    Inspect, accept or reject deliverables during        Refresher Training:
                                        • Project management                                                                         • Minimum of 16 hours COR specific training:
                                                                                contract performance and at close-out in
                                        • Strategic planning                                                                            o Every 3 years, OR
                                                                                conformance with contract terms and conditions.
                                        • Understanding the marketplace
                                                                           •    Review and validate that contractor payment             o Before assuming COR responsibilities, if
                                                                                requests are commensurate with performance.                 the individual has not served as a COR
                                                                           •    Monitor and control disposition of government               within the previous 24 months.
                                                                                furnished assets.                                    • Annual DoD Component provided ethics
                                                                           •    Perform surveillance in a contingency                   (designated OGE Form 450 filers only
                                                                                environment, when applicable.                        • CTIP training every 3 years
                                                                           •    Other specific functions consistent with the         • Any additional training mandated by the
                                                                                objectives of the activity’s mandatory specialized      contracting activity or agency.
                                                                                or technical training.                               • Any necessary for maintenance of license or
                                                                                                                                        certification, etc.



                                                                                     30
 Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                                                                                                         ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                       DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015

                                             GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


 CAO                   contract administration office
 COR                   contracting officer’s representative
 CPARS                 contractor performance assessment reporting system
 CTIP                  combating trafficking in persons

 DAO                   departmental accountable official
 DAU                   Defense Acquisition University
 DAWIA                 Defense Acquisition Workforce Improvement Act
 DCAA                  Defense Contract Audit Agency
 DFARS                 Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement
 DoDI                  DoD instruction

 EDA                   electronic document access

 JAM                   joint appointment module

 LH                    labor-hour contract

 NATO                  North Atlantic Treaty Organization

 OGE                   Office of Government Ethics

 PIEE                  procurement integrated enterprise environment


 SPOT                  synchronized pre-deployment and operational tracker
 SPM                   surveillance and performance monitoring

 T&M                   time and materials contract

 WAWF                  wide area work flow




                                                31
Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                              GLOSSARY
                                                                                 DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015

                                           PART II. DEFINITIONS


Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

acquisition. Defined in subpart 2.101 of Reference (e).

agency. Defined in subpart 202.101 of Reference (f).

agency experience. Experience acquired as a DoD or non-DoD employee (including contractor
experience) or member of the Military Services that provides insight into DoD’s organizational
structure, policies, and procedures that are relevant to performance of COR responsibilities.

CAO. Defined in subpart 2.101 of Reference (e).

certifying official. Defined in section 2773a of chapter 165 of Reference (l).

competencies. Observable, measurable patterns of skills, knowledge, abilities, behaviors, and
other characteristics that an individual needs to perform a specific function. Competencies may
be acquired or developed through a combination of formal education, training, and experience.

contract. Defined in subpart 2.101 of Reference (e).

contracting activity. Defined in subpart 2.101 of Reference (e) and subpart 202.101 of
Reference (f).

contracting office. Defined in subpart 2.101 of Reference (e).

contracting officer. Defined in subpart 2.101 of Reference (e).

contingency operation. Defined in subpart 2.101 of Reference (e).

COR. Defined in subpart 202.101 of Reference (f). Any individual delegated responsibilities
pursuant to subpart 1.602-2 of Reference (e), regardless of local terminology, must be certified in
accordance with this instruction. For example, local terminology can be COR, contracting
officer’s technical representative, technical point of contact, technical representative, alternate
COR, administrative COR, assistant COR, line item manager, task order manager, quality
assurance personnel, quality assurance evaluator, or COR management.

COR certification. The designation of a COR for a specific contract via letter of designation that
constitutes certification for performance of COR responsibilities under that specific contract.

COR experience. Earlier performance of technical and administrative responsibilities designated
by a contracting officer.

COR management. The specific chain of command within the requiring activity responsible for
supervision and management of the COR.

                                                       32
Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                                          GLOSSARY
                                                                                   DoDI 5000.72, March 26, 2015

COR nominee. An individual identified by the requiring activity and accepted by the contracting
officer as having met the qualification requirements (training, or a training plan if not yet trained,
agency experience, relevant technical experience, and general competencies) to perform the
COR responsibilities to be designated by a contracting officer in accordance with subpart 1.602-
2 of Reference (e).

COR-specific training. Training that is relevant to performance of COR responsibilities to be
designated by a contracting officer.

DAWIA certification. The procedure through which a Military Service or DoD Component
determines that an employee meets the education, training, and experience standards required for
a career level in any acquisition, technology, and logistics career field.

departmental accountable official. Defined in section 2773a of chapter 165 of Reference (l) and
the DoD 7000.14-R, DoD Financial Management Regulation, volume 5, Disbursing Policy.

letter of designation. Written notification from the contracting officer to the COR specifying the
extent of the COR’s authority to act on behalf of the contracting officer, identifying the
limitations on the COR’s authority, specifying the period covered by the designation, stating the
authority is not re-delegable, and stating that the COR may be personally liable for unauthorized
acts. Terms previously used included letter of delegation, letter of appointment, and letter of
assignment.

NATO/Coalition Partners. Countries that are members of NATO or part of a military coalition
that includes the United States that conduct military operations in support of a common
objective. The NATO is an Alliance that consists of 28 independent member countries: Albania,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States.

performance risk. Risk associated with a contractor’s ability to perform a contract in a manner
consistent with the cost, technical, and schedule requirements of the contract. Performance risk
varies depending on the nature of the work or requirement being performed, mission needs of the
activity, and other factors that have bearing on the contractor’s performance. Contracting
officers should consider performance risk when determining the need for COR resources and the
qualifications required of the COR based upon the type of work or requirement as referenced in
Enclosure 5 of this instruction.

relevant technical experience. Knowledge or practical experience in technical, professional, or
administrative fields that is commensurate with the responsibilities that will be designated to the
COR under a specific contract. Relevant technical experience is generally acquired through
education, job performance, or direct hands-on training (e.g., while in a trainee or intern
developmental position).

requiring activity. The organization providing either the technical oversight of the requirement
or receiving the services. When there is a transfer of funding from one agency to another agency
(e.g., Military Interdepartmental Procurement Request), unless otherwise stipulated, the requiring
activity is that activity providing technical oversight or receiving the services.
                                                         33
Change 2, 11/06/2020                                                                         GLOSSARY
