                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 1005.06
                                                                                 July 17, 2015

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Display of the National Flag at Half-staff

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5124.02 (Reference (a)), this
instruction reissues DoD Instruction 1005.06 (Reference (b)) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities for display of the national flag of the United States at half-staff:

   a. On the death of present and former principal officials of the Federal Government.

   b. During national days of mourning.

    c. When directed by proclamation by the President of the United States, governor of any
State, territory, or U.S. possession, or the Mayor of the District of Columbia in accordance with
section 7 of Title 4, United States Code (Reference (c)) or by the Secretary of Defense in
accordance with Presidential Proclamation 3044 (Reference (d)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to:

     a. OSD, the Military Departments (including the Coast Guard at all times, including when it
is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security by agreement with that Department), the
Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant
Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred
to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD Components”).

   b. The Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service and the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, under agreements with the Departments of Health and Human
Services and Commerce, respectively.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that the national flag will be flown at half-staff:

   a. Worldwide on all DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels:
                                                                       DoDI 1005.06, July 17, 2015


       (1) On Memorial Day until noon, then raised to the top of the staff in accordance with
Reference (c).

       (2) On Peace Officers Memorial Day, May 15 of each year, in accordance with
Reference (c) and section 136 of Title 36, United States Code (Reference (e)), unless that day is
also Armed Forces Day.

       (3) On Patriot Day, September 11 of each year, in accordance with section 144 of
Reference (e).

       (4) On National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day, December 7 of each year, in
accordance with section 129 of Reference (e).

       (5) Each year in honor of the National Fallen Firefighters Memorial Service in
accordance with Public Law 107-51 (Reference (f)). This date is usually the first Sunday in
October and is announced annually by Presidential proclamation.

        (6) On the death of individuals listed in Enclosure 2 of this instruction, on receipt of
notification of death from any reliable source, including news media.

       (7) When so directed by the President or the Secretary of Defense.

    b. On DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels in the area covered by a proclamation
issued by the governor of any State, territory, or U.S. possession or the Mayor of the District of
Columbia that the national flag be flown at half-staff because of the death of a member of the
Military Services from that State, territory, or U.S. possession or the District of Columbia who
died while serving on active duty in accordance with Reference (c).

    c. On DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels outside the United States, even if another
nation’s flag is flown full-staff next to the national flag of the United States, whenever paragraph
3a of this instruction applies.

    d. On buildings, grounds, or naval vessels under the jurisdiction of the Secretaries of the
Military Departments on occasions, other than those specified in paragraphs 3a and 3b of this
instruction, that the Secretaries of the Military Departments consider proper and appropriate.
The Secretaries of the Military Departments may delegate their authority, in writing, to authorize
flying the flag at half-staff to individual post, station, detachment, ship or installation
commanders under their jurisdiction for occasions they consider proper and appropriate;
commanders may not further re-delegate this authority.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES.

    a. Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R)
establishes policies governing the conduct of flying the national flag at half-staff for all DoD
Components and oversees DoD implementation of this instruction.



                                                  2
                                                                     DoDI 1005.06, July 17, 2015


   b. Secretaries of the Military Departments. The Secretaries of the Military Departments:

       (1) Ensure Component implementation of this instruction and compliance with its
provisions.

        (2) Designate buildings, grounds, or naval vessels under their jurisdiction as appropriate
for display of the national flag at half-staff. The Secretaries of the Military Departments may
delegate their authority to authorize flying the flag at half-staff to individual post, station,
detachment, ship or installation commanders under their jurisdiction for occasions they consider
proper and appropriate.

       (3) Implement uniform Service procedures for flying the national flag at half-staff by all
the U.S. military units under their authority and pursuant to Reference (c).


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


6. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective July 17, 2015.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Guidance for Display of the National Flag at Half-staff
Glossary




                                                 3
                                                                DoDI 1005.06, July 17, 2015


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b) DoD Instruction 1005.06, “Display of the National Flag at Half-Staff,” April 1, 2008
    (hereby cancelled)
(c) Section 7 of Title 4, United States Code
(d) Presidential Proclamation 3044, “Display of the Flag of the United States of America at
    Half-Staff Upon the Death of Certain Officials and Former Officials,” March 1, 1954, as
    amended by Presidential Proclamation 3948, December 12, 1969.
(e) Title 36, United States Code
(f) Public Law 107-51, “Memorializing Fallen Firefighters by Lowering the American Flag to
    Half-Staff in Honor of the National Fallen Firefighters Memorial Service in Emmitsburg,
    Maryland,” October 16, 2001




                                             4                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDI 1005.06, July 17, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

         GUIDANCE FOR DISPLAY OF THE NATIONAL FLAG AT HALF-STAFF


1. FLAG DISPLAY. The national flag, when flown at half-staff, will be hoisted first to the peak
momentarily and then lowered to the half-staff position. The flag will be raised again to the peak
before being lowered for the day.


2. 30-DAY DISPLAY. Flags on all DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels worldwide will
be displayed at half-staff for a period of 30 days from the day of death of the following persons:

   a. President.

   b. Former President.

   c. President-elect.


3. 10-DAY DISPLAY. Flags on all DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels worldwide will
be displayed at half-staff for a period of 10 days from the day of death of the following persons:

   a. Vice President.

   b. Vice President-elect.

   c. Chief Justice or retired Chief Justice of the United States.

   d. Speaker of the House of Representatives.


4. VARIOUS DISPLAY PERIODS

    a. Flags on all DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels worldwide will be displayed at
half-staff from the day of death through the day of interment of the following persons:

       (1) Associate Justice of the Supreme Court (including retired Associate Justice).

       (2) Former Vice President.

       (3) Member of the Cabinet.

       (4) Former Secretary of Defense.

       (5) Secretary of the Army, Navy, or Air Force.



                                                 5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 1005.06, July 17, 2015



    b. Flags on all DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels worldwide will be displayed at
half-staff from the day of death until the day of interment or 7 days, whichever is less. When the
date of interment occurs beyond the seventh day, the flag will again be lowered to half-staff on
the date of interment of the following persons:

       (1) Deputy Secretary of Defense.

       (2) Under Secretaries of Defense.

       (3) Principal Deputy Under Secretaries of Defense.

       (4) Assistant Secretaries of Defense.

       (5) Other officials in OSD compensated at Executive Levels III or IV.

       (6) Chairman or former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

       (7) Vice Chairman or former Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

       (8) Five-star general or flag officer.

       (9) Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.

       (10) Commandant, U.S. Marine Corps.

       (11) Chief of Naval Operations.

       (12) Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force.

       (13) Chief, National Guard Bureau

       (14) Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard.

    c. Flags on all DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels worldwide will be displayed at
half-staff from the day of death through the day of interment of the following Members of
Congress:

       (1) President Pro Tempore of the Senate.

       (2) Majority Leader of the Senate.

       (3) Minority Leader of the Senate.

       (4) Majority Leader of the House of Representatives.




                                                6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDI 1005.06, July 17, 2015


       (5) Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.

    d. Flags on all DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels worldwide will be displayed at
half-staff from the day of death through the following day upon the deaths of the persons listed
in paragraphs 4d(1) - d(4) of this enclosure. Additionally, the flag will also be flown at half-staff
on all DoD buildings, grounds, and naval vessels in the State, congressional district, territory, or
commonwealth of these officials from the day of death through the day of interment.

       (1) A U.S. Senator.

       (2) A representative, U.S. House of Representatives.

       (3) A territorial delegate.

       (4) A resident commissioner from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

    e. On the death of a governor of a State, territory, or U.S. possession, or the Mayor of the
District of Columbia, the period of display will be the day of death through the day of interment
for flags located on all DoD buildings and grounds in the State, territory, or U.S. possession of
the deceased official.

    f. On the death of an active duty Service member, the period of display will be as directed in
the proclamation issued by the governor of the State, territory, or U.S. possession or the Mayor
of the District of Columbia, or as otherwise directed pursuant to paragraph 4e of this enclosure.




                                                  7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 1005.06, July 17, 2015


                                           GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


USD(P&R)              Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

full-staff. The position of the national flag when it is at the top of the staff.

half-staff. The position of the national flag when it is one-half the distance between the top
and the bottom of the staff.




                                                  8                                 GLOSSARY
