                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                           NUMBER 6400.07
                                                                           November 25, 2013
                                                        Incorporating Change 3, March 18, 2025

                                                                                     USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Standards for Victim Assistance Services in the Military Community

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction, in accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD)
5124.02 (Reference (a)):

    a. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and sets standards for victim assistance
services within the military community. These standards are consistent with the Standards for
Victim Assistance Programs and Providers (Reference (b)) established by the National Victim
Assistance Standards Consortium, but incorporate the unique needs of the military community.

    b. Establishes the DoD Victim Assistance Leadership Council, referred to in this instruction
as “the Council.”


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD
Components”).

    b. Does not apply to civilian complainants covered under Equal Employment Opportunity
policy.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The DoD Components will do all that is possible within limits of available resources to
assist victims of crime and harassment in accordance with the requirements listed in DoD
Instruction (DoDI) 1030.2 (Reference (c)) and DoDD 1350.2 (Reference (d)). Particular
attention will be paid to victims of serious, violent crime, including child abuse, domestic
violence, and sexual misconduct.
                                                               DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013



    b. A complainant under DoD Military Equal Opportunity (MEO) policy, as contained in
Reference (d), and Service-specific regulations, will receive the same treatment as a person
identified as a victim for the purposes of this instruction.

    c. DoD victim assistance services will focus on the victim and will respond, protect, and care
for the victim from initiation of a report through offense disposition or until the victim no longer
requires services.

   d. DoD standards for victim assistance services must meet the competency, ethical, and
foundational levels described in Enclosure 2 of this instruction.

    e. The DoD Victim Assistance Leadership Council will advise the Secretary of Defense on
policies and practices related to the provision of victim assistance across the DoD.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 3.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
language to comply with Executive Order 14173(Reference (e)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective November 25, 2013.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Standards for Victim Assistance Personnel
   3. Responsibilities
   4. Victim Assistance Leadership Council Charter
Glossary




Change 3, 03/18/2025                             2
                                                            DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b)   DeHart, D.D. (2003) National Victim Assistance Standards Consortium: Standards for
      Victim Assistance Programs and Providers. Columbia, SC: Center for Child and Family
      Studies, University of South Carolina
(c)   DoD Instruction 1030.2, “Victim and Witness Assistance Procedures,” June 4, 2004
(d)   DoD Directive 1350.2, “DoD Military Equal Opportunity Program,” August 18, 1995, as
      amended
(e)   Executive Order 14173, “Ending Illegal Discrimination and Restoring Merit-Based
      Opportunity,” January 21, 2025
(f)   DoD Directive 6495.01, “Sexual Assault Prevention and Response (SAPR) Program,”
      January 23, 2012, as amended
(g)   DoD Instruction 6400.06, “Domestic Abuse Involving DoD Military and Certain Affiliated
      Personnel,” September 20, 2011, as amended
(h)   DoD 5400.11, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(i)   Chapter 47 of Title 10, United States Code, also known as the “Uniform Code of Military
      Justice”




Change 3, 03/18/2025                          3                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                    STANDARDS FOR VICTIM ASSISTANCE PERSONNEL


1. COMPETENCY STANDARDS

    a. General. Victim assistance personnel are expected to maintain standards of competence.
They provide victim assistance services in accordance with DoD and Military Service
qualification requirements, such as education, training, or relevant experience. Victim assistance
personnel must exercise careful judgment, apply flexibility and innovative problem-solving, and
take appropriate precautions to protect victims’ welfare under the guiding principle of “do no
harm.”

   b. Communication. Victim assistance personnel communicate effectively with victims by:

       (1) Recognizing and understanding the basic principles of effective communication,
including verbal, nonverbal, and cultural variation.

       (2) Listening attentively to the victims and using the information they provide to offer
appropriate assistance and provide information and resources that the victim may elect to pursue.

       (3) Using effective communication to de-escalate crisis situations, seeking support as
necessary so that assessment and assistance planning may take place.

          (4) Monitoring their own verbal and nonverbal reactions when communicating with the
victim.

       (5) Educating and explaining their roles to victims and to other agency personnel that
address victims’ needs.

       (6) Understanding and describing to victims the variety of resources, advocacy, and
outreach services available in the immediate vicinity (e.g., on- and off-base financial assistance
resources; medical care and counseling; spiritual support services; and social welfare services,
which may include child protective services or guardian ad litem services, as relevant to the
persons served).

    c. Response to Victimization. Victim assistance personnel help victims deal with their
individual response to victimization by:

       (1) Recognizing the range of reactions to victimization (e.g., anger, self-blame,
helplessness) and responding to the victim accordingly.

        (2) Recognizing the impact of trauma on victims’ ability to connect to assistance services
and to assist in the military justice or administrative process.




Change 3, 03/18/2025                             4                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


       (3) Understanding the relationship dynamics and environmental stressors (e.g., previous
victimization, dependence on the perpetrator) as these relate to victim response and resiliency.

          (4) Recognizing the importance of victim self-care.

       (5) Understanding the impact of specific types of crime or offense on the needs of
victims and using specific support, as appropriate, to the type of victimization (i.e., developing
and using safety planning, as relevant to the persons being served).

    d. Crisis Support. Victim assistance personnel provide support when confronted with a
crisis situation by:

       (1) Understanding specific program policies and procedures for crisis situations and
recognizing what constitutes a crisis or danger to the victim or others.

       (2) Listening attentively to allow and accept the victim’s retelling of the event in order to
appropriately identify a crisis situation.

          (3) Understanding and facilitating victim safety, as applicable, to the victim being
served.

        (4) Recognizing exceptions to Restricted Reporting as contained in DoD
Directive 6495.01 (Reference (f)) and DoD Instruction 6400.06 (Reference (g)), applicable
privileged communications, and privacy rules and limitations on disclosure of information to
other parties in crisis or dangerous situations. Ensure all personally identifiable information (PII)
is collected, maintained, disseminated, and used in accordance with DoD 5400.11-R (Reference
(h)).

        (5) Addressing foreseeable crisis situations (i.e., understanding signs leading to suicidal
ideation and attempts and how to appropriately intervene) and contacting appropriate experts, if
needed.

          (6) Helping victims identify and prepare for potential stressors.


2. ETHICAL STANDARDS. Within the military community, victim assistance personnel are
required to abide by standards for appropriate and ethical conduct when performing duties by:

   a. Ensuring understanding by the victim that participation in victim assistance services is
voluntary.

    b. Respecting the privacy of information provided by the victims served or acquired from
other sources before, during, and after the course of the professional relationship in accordance
with Restricted Reporting, applicable privileged communications, and privacy rules. Ensure all
PII is collected, maintained, disseminated, and used in accordance with Reference (i).




Change 3, 03/18/2025                               5                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


   c. Understanding their responsibilities, limitations, and the implications of their actions
within the victim assistance setting and perform duties in accordance with applicable laws,
regulations, policies, and rights of person(s) served.

   d. Respecting victims’ rights and acting accordingly.

    e. Refraining from behaviors that communicate blame or suspicion regarding victim
accounts of the crime or offense, condemnation for past behavior, or other judgmental sentiments
to the victim.

   f. Avoiding conflicts of interest and disclosing any possible conflict to the appropriate
program personnel and victims served.

   g. Not improperly discriminating against a victim for any reason.

    h. Respecting boundaries of the victim assistance role, including distinguishing personal
feelings from professional responses, and promoting empowerment of victims rather than
rescuing them.

   i. Accurately representing roles of victim assistance personnel, which may include
qualifications, titles, and credentials, in relationships with the person(s) being served.

   j. Maintaining objectivity and professional conduct in relationships with victims (e.g., by
avoiding impropriety and the appearance of impropriety, not engaging in a relationship that goes
beyond victim assistance responsibilities, and avoiding abuse of a position).

   k. Achieving and maintaining professional competence by:

        (1) Seeking support and increased levels of supervision when necessary to serve the best
interests of a victim to include collaborating with another professional with the victim’s
permission.

       (2) Not engaging in victim assistance duties while under the influence of drugs or
alcohol.

       (3) Refraining from providing services when experiencing a mental or physical condition
that impairs the ability and judgment to perform duties safely.

    l. Knowing the interests of the persons served are a very important responsibility while
performing victim assistance duties.


3. FOUNDATIONAL STANDARDS FOR PROGRAMS. These standards identify ways of
documenting and administering services to ensure quality and responsiveness to victims’ needs.
In relation to the goals and objectives of the individual program, these foundational standards




Change 3, 03/18/2025                             6                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


will be incorporated, as appropriate to the persons served, into the specific victim assistance
programs consistent with law and Service regulations.

   a. Access to Resources and Services: Victims will be provided with information regarding
available resources and services appropriate to their needs as applicable by assistance personnel.

       (1) Each victim assistance program must establish and advertise their standard hours of
operation and contact information.

       (2) Victim assistance personnel will:

            (a) Describe to victims in clear language the capabilities and limitations of the victim
assistance role.

           (b) Provide a complete explanation of victim’s rights and reporting options.

           (c) Provide information to victims for appropriate service resources on- and off-base.
Services may include, but are not limited to, health care, counseling, social welfare agencies,
child protective services, military and civilian protective orders, and legal assistance.

             (d) As needed, provide victims publicly available written information on the
available services on- and off-base (e.g., safety planning, advocacy, compensation and
restitution, physical and mental health care, social services, spiritual services, legal services) and
resources and procedures for:

               1. Addressing imminent danger (e.g., stalking, victim or witness intimidation)

               2. Obtaining information on administrative or military justice proceedings.

           (e) Respect victims’ right to make their own decisions about the services received.

           (f) Advocate appropriately on behalf of victims’ rights and needs throughout service
delivery (within the limits of ethics and program policy).

           (g) Ensure that, in accordance with Service regulations, victims’ basic rights are
explained to them and how those rights apply to their individual situation.

           (h) Engage in ongoing support and follow-up for individual victims as applicable.

           (i) If an imminent danger situation is current, immediately contact law enforcement.

    b. Interaction with the Military Justice System. Victims of crime will be provided
information concerning the military justice and administrative processes, as applicable to the
victim being served. Regardless of any professional titles, credentials, or licenses maintained by
victim assistance personnel, their direct victim assistance will not involve clinical treatment or
legal advice. They should not represent themselves as licensed medical, psychological,



Change 3, 03/18/2025                              7                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


behavioral health, or legal advisors. In situations when victims need such services, victim
assistance personnel must refer victims to licensed clinicians or attorneys. Victim assistance
personnel must:

         (1) Explain in clear language the interaction between the program’s victim assistance
services and the military justice system, in particular by recognizing and explaining how other
military or civilian personnel may relate to the victim throughout the military justice process
(e.g., victim-witness assistance personnel, investigators, lawyers, commanders, guardians ad
litem).

        (2) Know the processes for helping victims access and participate in military justice,
administrative, and service-related systems. Recognize the significant impact that military
justice and administrative proceedings can have for victims, both as potential environments for
victim empowerment or re-traumatization under the circumstances.

       (3) Manage the expectations of military justice or administrative proceedings.

       (4) Ensure that, in accordance with Service regulations, victims get help as needed in
advocating for their rights in military justice or administrative settings.

      (5) Ensure that, in accordance with Service regulations, victims understand basic
components of proper decorum and courtroom proceedings as relevant to their needs.

       (6) Ensure that, in accordance with Service regulations, victims understand the
prohibitions against victim assistance personnel on providing legal advice and legal
representation.

       (7) Provide liaison assistance with other organizations and agencies on victim care
matters relevant to the person being served.




Change 3, 03/18/2025                            8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R):

  a. Develops and establishes overall policy for standards for victim assistance services and
monitors compliance with this instruction.

   b. Maintains the DoD Victim Assistance Leadership Council to provide a forum that
promotes efficiencies, coordinates victim assistance-related policies, and assesses the
implementation of victim assistance standards across the DoD’s victim assistance-related
programs.


2. CHAIR OF THE DoD VICTIM ASSISTANCE LEADERSHIP COUNCIL. Under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), the Council chair ensures that the Council
recommends guidance for and provides oversight of DoD Component victim assistance-related
programs and policies that meet the policies and standards in this instruction.


3. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

   a. Ensure compliance with this instruction.

   b. Establish policies and procedures consistent with this instruction.

   c. Establish Component policies and procedures to develop and implement victim assistance
programs in accordance with the standards in this instruction.


4. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In addition to the responsibilities
in section 3 of this enclosure, the Secretaries of the Military Departments will designate a general
or flag officer (G/FO) or Senior Executive Service (SES) level representative to serve on the
Council as described in Enclosure 4 of this instruction.




Change 3, 03/18/2025                             9                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 4

                    DoD VICTIM ASSISTANCE LEADERSHIP COUNCIL


1. OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF ACTIVITIES

    a. The Council will advise the Secretary of Defense, through the USD(P&R), on policies and
practices related to the provision of victim assistance across the DoD.

   b. Council objectives will include, but not be limited to:

       (1) To promote efficiencies, coordinate victim assistance-related policies, and assess the
implementation of victim assistance standards across the DoD’s victim assistance-related
programs.

        (2) To provide a forum for senior leaders to exchange information and collaborate on
issues affecting victims of crime and harassment within the DoD.

   c. For the purposes of the Council and this instruction, the victim assistance-related
programs consist of:

       (1) The Sexual Assault Prevention and Response (SAPR) Program.

       (2) The Family Advocacy Program (FAP).

       (3) The Victim Witness Assistance Program (VWAP).

       (4) The MEO Program.


2. COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP

   a. Chair

        (1) The Director of the Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office (SAPRO) will
serve as the Council chair for 2 years from the Council’s inaugural meeting. Thereafter, the
chair position will be filled by its serving members on a rotating basis.

     (2) If the Chair cannot fulfill the 2-year term, a new chair will be designated by the
USD(P&R) to fulfill remaining commitment of the two-year term.

   b. Members. The Council will be comprised of full-time or permanent part-time federal
employees. Membership will include:




Change 3, 03/18/2025                            10                        ENCLOSURE 4
                                                              DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


        (1) A G/FO or SES level representative from each of the Military Services staffs, as well
as the National Guard Bureau, who has responsibility for or can speak on behalf of:

           (a) The SAPR Program.

           (b) The FAP.

           (c) The VWAP.

           (d) The MEO Program.

       (2) A representative on the G/FO or SES level from:

           (a) OSD FAP.

           (b) OSD, Office for Civil Rights and Equal Opportunity Policy.

           (c) The Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense.

           (d) The Department of Defense Human Resources Activity.

           (e) DoD SAPRO.

       (3) The Director, Office of Legal Policy, Office of the USD(P&R).

       (4) Other individuals as designated by the USD(P&R).

   c. In the event that designated personnel are unable to attend a particular Council meeting, a
comparable alternate (O-6 or civilian equivalent, or above) should be identified.

  d. Additional staff representatives below the O-6 level may be invited to accompany Council
members to provide program- or field-level expertise.

    e. Representatives from other DoD Components may be invited to specific Council meetings
as subject matter experts to inform and resolve issues addressed by the Council.


3. COUNCIL MEETINGS. The Council will meet, at a minimum, once per year. The Council
chair has the authority to schedule ad hoc meetings, as necessary.


4. QUORUM. The number of members required for a quorum will be determined at the
inaugural meeting of the Council.




Change 3, 03/18/2025                           11                        ENCLOSURE 4
                                                             DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


5. DURATION OF THE COUNCIL. The need for the Council is on a continuing basis. The
Chair will ensure this instruction and any applicable procedural guidance for the Council are
reviewed and certified current or amended, every two years, with the biennial review date
determined at the inaugural meeting.




Change 3, 03/18/2025                           12                       ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 DoDD                       DoD Directive
 DoDI                       DoD Instruction

 FAP                        Family Advocacy Program

 G/FO                       general or flag officer

 MEO                        Military Equal Opportunity

 PII                        personally identifiable information

 SAPR                       Sexual Assault Prevention and Response
 SAPRO                      Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office
 SES                        Senior Executive Service

 USD(P&R)                   Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness

 VWAP                       Victim Witness Assistance Program


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

complainant. A Service member who files an allegation of harassment in accordance with DoD
MEO policy and service-specific regulations.

ethical standards. The behavioral expectations for victim assistance personnel when performing
victim assistance-related duties.

guardian ad litem. A term used in law to refer to the appointment by a court of one party to act
in a court of law on behalf of another party —for instance, a child or an incapacitated adult—
who is deemed incapable of representing him or herself.

Restricted Reporting. Defined in Reference (f) and Reference (d).

victim. A person who has suffered direct physical, emotional, or pecuniary harm as a result of
the commission of a crime committed in violation of Chapter 47 of Title 10 of the United States
Code (also known as the “Uniform Code of Military Justice” (Reference (i)) or in violation of the
law of another jurisdiction if any portion of the investigation is conducted primarily by the one or
more DoD Components.




Change 3, 03/18/2025                             13                            GLOSSARY
                                                              DoDI 6400.07, November 25, 2013


victim assistance personnel. Personnel who are available to provide support and assistance to
victims of crime and harassment consistent with their assigned responsibilities and in accordance
with this instruction. They include part-time, full-time, collateral duty, and other authorized
individuals, and may be domestic violence or sexual assault prevention and response
coordinators (to include unit and uniformed victim advocates), Sexual Assault Response
Coordinators, victim-witness assistance personnel, or military equal opportunity advisors.

victim assistance-related programs. The SAPR Program; FAP; and the VWAP. A complainant
under the DoD MEO Program may be referred by the MEO office to one of the victim
assistance-related programs for additional assistance.




Change 3, 03/18/2025                           14                           GLOSSARY
