                                  Department of Defense

                                   DIRECTIVE
                                                                                 NUMBER 5500.11
                                                                                    May 27, 1971
                                                               Certified Current as of November 21, 2003




                                                                Incorporating Change 1, August 15, 1972
                                                                                         ASD(M&RA)

SUBJECT: Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs

Reference: (a) Public Law 88-352, "The Civil Rights Act of 1964," 78 Stat. 241, July 2, 1964


1. PURPOSE

The purpose of this Directive is to effectuate the provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (hereafter referred to as the "Act") to the end that no person in the United States shall, on
the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the
benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving
Federal financial assistance from any component of the Department of Defense.


2. DEFINITIONS

    2.1. Component means the Office of the Secretary of a Military Department or a Defense
Agency.

     2.2. Responsible Department official means the Secretary of Defense or other official of the
Department of Defense or component thereof who by law or by delegation has the principal
responsibility within the Department or component, for the administration of the law extending
such assistance.

      2.3. The term United States means the States of the United States, the District of Columbia,
Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, the Canal Zone, and the
territories and possessions of the United States, and the term "State" means any one of the
foregoing.

     2.4. The term Federal financial assistance includes:
                                                                     DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


          2.4.1. Grants and loans of Federal funds;

          2.4.2. The grant or donation of Federal property and interests in property;

          2.4.3. The detail of Federal personnel;

           2.4.4. The sale and lease of, and the permission to use (on other than a casual or
transient basis), Federal property or any interest in such property without consideration or at a
nominal consideration, or at a consideration, or at a consideration which is reduced for the
purpose of assisting the recipient, or in recognition of the public interest to be served by such
sale or lease to the recipient; and

          2.4.5. Any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of its
purposes the provision of assistance.

     2.5. The term program includes any program, project, or activity for the provision of
services, financial aid, or other benefits to individuals, or for the provision of facilities for
furnishing services, financial aid or other benefits to individuals. The services, financial aid, or
other benefits provided under a program receiving Federal financial assistance shall be deemed
to include any services, financial aid, or other benefits provided with the aid of Federal financial
assistance or with the aid of any non-Federal funds, property, or other resources required to be
expended or made available for the program to meet matching requirements or other conditions
that must be met in order to receive the Federal financial assistance and to include any services,
financial aid, or other benefits provided in or through a facility provided with the aid of Federal
financial assistance or such non-Federal resources.

     2.6. The term facility includes all or any portion of structures, equipment, or other real or
personal property or interests therein, and the provision of facilities includes the construction,
expansion, renovation, remodeling, alteration or acquisition of facilities.

     2.7. The term recipient means any State, political subdivision of any State, or
instrumentality of any State or political subdivision, any public or private agency, institution, or
organization, or other entity, or any individual, in any State, to whom Federal financial assistance
is extended, directly or through another recipient, for any program, including any successor,
assign, or transferee thereof, but such term does not include any ultimate beneficiary under any
such program.

     2.8. The term primary recipient means any recipient who is authorized or required to
extend Federal financial assistance to another recipient for the purpose of carrying out a
program.

     2.9. The term applicant means one who submits an application, request, or plan required to
be approved by a responsible Department official, or by a primary recipient, as a condition to
eligibility for Federal financial assistance, and the term "application" means such an application,
request or plan.


                                                 2
                                                                     DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971




3. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to any program for which Federal financial assistance is authorized under
a law administered by any component of the Department of Defense, including the Federally
assisted programs and activities listed in enclosure 1 of this Directive. This Directive applies to
money paid, property transferred, or other Federal financial assistance extended under any such
program after January 7, 1965 pursuant to an application approved prior to such date. This
Directive does not apply to:

     3.1. Any Federal financial assistance by way of insurance guaranty contracts;

     3.2. Money paid, property transferred, or other assistance extended under any such
program, before January 7, 1965;

     3.3. Any assistance to any individual who is the ultimate beneficiary under any such
program; or

     3.4. Any employment practice, under any such program, of any employer, employment
agency, or labor organization, except as noted in subparagraph 4.2.5., below. The fact that a
program or activity is not listed in enclosure 1 shall not mean, if Title VI of the Act is otherwise
applicable, that such program is not covered. Other programs under statutes now in force or
hereinafter enacted may be added to this list by notice published in the Federal Register.


4. POLICY

     4.1. General. No person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national
origin be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to
discrimination under any program to which this Directive applies.

     4.2. Specific Discriminatory Actions Prohibited

          4.2.1. A recipient under any program to which this Directive applies may not, directly
or through contractual or other arrangements, on the ground of race, color, or national origin:

               4.2.1.1. Deny an individual any service, financial aid, or other benefit provided
under the program;

                 4.2.1.2. Provide any service, financial aid, or other benefit to an individual which
is different, or is provided in a different manner, from that provided to others under the program;

              4.2.1.3. In determining the site or location of facilities, make selections with the
purpose of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to


                                                  3
                                                                      DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


discrimination under any program to which this Directive applies, on the grounds of race, color,
or national origin; or with the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the
accomplishment of the objectives of the Act or this Directive;

                 4.2.1.4. Subject an individual to segregation or separate treatment in any matter
related to his receipt of any service, financial aid, or other benefit under the program;

               4.2.1.5. Restrict an individual in any way in the enjoyment of any advantage or
privilege enjoyed by others receiving any service, financial aid, or other benefit under the
program;

                4.2.1.6. Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether he
satisfies any admission, enrollment, quota, eligibility, membership or other requirement or
condition that individuals must meet in order to be provided any service, financial aid, or other
benefit provided under the program;

               4.2.1.7. Deny an individual an opportunity to participate in the program through
the provision of services or otherwise or afford him an opportunity to do so which is different
from that afforded others under the program.

              4.2.1.8. Deny a person the opportunity to participate as a member of a planning
or advisory body that is an integral part of the program.

            4.2.2. A recipient, in determining the types of services, financial aid, or other benefits,
or facilities that will be provided under any such program, or the class of individuals to whom, or
the situations in which, such services, financial aid, other benefits, or facilities will be provided
under any such program, or the class of individuals to be afforded an opportunity to participate in
any such program, may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria
or methods of administration that have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination
because of their race, color, or national origin, or have the effect of defeating or substantially
impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program with respect to individuals of a
particular race, color, or national origin.

           4.2.3. As used in this section the services, financial aid, or other benefits provided
under a program receiving Federal financial assistance shall be deemed to include any service,
financial aid, or other benefit provided in or through a facility provided with the aid of Federal
financial assistance.

          4.2.4.

               4.2.4.1. In administering a program regarding that the recipient has previously
discriminated against persons on the ground of race, color, or national origin, the recipient must
take affirmative action to overcome the effects of prior discrimination.




                                                  4
                                                                     DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


                4.2.4.2. Even in the absence of such prior discrimination, a recipient in
administering a program may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions that
resulted in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color, or national origin.

           4.2.5. Where a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance is not to provide
employment, but nevertheless discrimination on the grounds of race, color or national origin in
the employment practices of the recipient or other persons subject to this Directive tends, on the
grounds of race, color or national origin of the intended beneficiaries, to exclude intended
beneficiaries from participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to
discrimination under any program to which this Directive applies, the recipient or other persons
subject to this Directive are prohibited from (directly or through contractual or other
arrangements) subjecting an individual to discrimination on the grounds of race, color, or
national origin in its employment practices under such program (including recruitment or
recruitment advertising; employment, layoff or termination; upgrading, demotion or transfer;
rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and use of facilities), to the extent necessary to
ensure equality of opportunity to, and nondiscriminatory treatment of the beneficiaries. Any
action taken by a DoD Component pursuant to this provision with respect to a State or local
agency subject to the Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration, 45 C.F.R. 70,
shall be consistent with those standards and shall be coordinated with the United States Civil
Service Commission.

         4.2.6. The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited discrimination, in this
paragraph does not limit the generality of the prohibition in paragraph 4.1. of this section.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

     5.1. The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) shall be
responsible for insuring that the policies of this Directive are effectuated throughout the
Department of Defense. He may review from time to time as he deems necessary the
implementation of these policies by the components of the Department of the Defense.

     5.2. The Secretary of each Military Department is responsible for implementing this
Directive with respect to programs and activities receiving financial assistance from his Military
Department; and the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) is
responsible for similarly implementing this Directive with respect to all other components of the
Department of Defense. Each may designate official(s) to fulfill this responsibility in accordance
with paragraph 2.2. of this Directive.

     5.3. The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) or, after
consultation with the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs), the
Secretary of each Military Department or other responsible Department official designated by the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) may assign to officials of other
Departments or Agencies of the Government, with the consent of such Departments or Agencies,
responsibilities in connection with the effectuation of the purposes of Title VI of the Act and this


                                                 5
                                                                      DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


Directive (other than responsibility for final decision as provided in section 11.), including the
achievement of effective coordination and maximum uniformity within the Department and
within the Executive Branch of the Government in the application of Title VI and this Directive
to similar programs and in similar situations. Any action taken, determination made, or
requirement imposed by an official of another Department or Agency acting pursuant to an
assignment of responsibility under this paragraph shall have the same effect as though such
action had been taken by the responsible official of this Agency.


6. ASSURANCES REQUIRED

     6.1. General

          6.1.1. Every application for Federal financial assistance to carry out a program to
which this Directive applies, except a program to which paragraph 6.2. applies and every
application for Federal financial assistance to provide a facility shall as a condition to its
approval and the extension of any Federal financial assistance pursuant to the application,
contain or be accompanied by an assurance that the program will be conducted or the facility
operated in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this Directive.

           6.1.2. In the case where the Federal financial assistance is to provide or is in the form
of personal property, or real property or interest therein or structures thereon, the assurance shall
obligate the recipient, or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during
which the property or structures are used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance
is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services and benefits, or for
as long as the recipient retains ownership or possession of the property, whichever is longer. In
all other cases the assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal
financial assistance is extended pursuant to the application. In any case in which Federal
financial assistance is extended without an application having been made, such extension shall be
subject to the same assurances as if an application had been made. The responsible Department
official shall specify the form of the foregoing assurances for each program, and the extent to
which like assurances will be required of subgrantees, contractors and subcontractors,
transferees, successors in interest, and other participants In the program. Any such assurance
shall include provisions that give the United States a right to seek its judicial enforcement.

           6.1.3. In the case of real property, structures or improvements thereon, or interests
therein, which was acquired through a program of Federal financial assistance, or in the case
where Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of a transfer of real property or interest
therein from the Federal Government, the instrument effecting or recording the transfer, shall
contain a covenant running with the land assuring nondiscrimination for the period during which
the real property is used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is extended or
for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits, or for as long as the
recipient retains ownership or possession of the property, whichever is longer. Where no transfer
of property is involved, but property is improved under a program of Federal financial assistance,
the recipient shall agree to include such a covenant in any subsequent transfer of such property.


                                                  6
                                                                      DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


Where the property is obtained from the Federal Government, such covenant may also include a
condition coupled with a right to be reserved by the Department to revert title to the property in
the event of a breach of the covenant where, in the discretion of the responsible Department
official, such a condition and right of reverter is appropriate to the program under which the real
property is obtained and to the nature of the grant and the grantee. In the event a transferee of
real property proposes to mortgage or otherwise encumber the real property as security for
financing construction of new, or improvement of existing facilities on such property for the
purposes for which the property was transferred, the responsible Department official may agree,
upon request of the transferee and if necessary to accomplish such financing, and upon such
conditions as he deems appropriate, to forbear the exercise of such right to revert title for so long
as the lien of such mortgage or other encumbrance remains effective. In programs receiving
Federal financial assistance in the form, or for the acquisition of real property or an interest in
real property, to the extent that rights to space on, over, or under any such property are included
as part of the program receiving such assistance, the nondiscrimination requirements of this
Directive shall extend to any facility located wholly or in part in such space.

           6.1.4. The assurance required in the case of a transfer of surplus personal property
shall be inserted in a written agreement by and between the Department of Defense component
concerned and the recipient.

      6.2. Continuing State Programs. Every application by a State or a State agency to carry out
a program involving continuing Federal financial assistance to which this Directive applies shall
as a condition to its approval and the extension of any Federal financial assistance pursuant to the
application:

           6.2.1. Contain or be accompanied by a statement that the program is (or, in the case of
a new program, will be) conducted in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant
to this Directive; and

           6.2.2. Provide or be accompanied by provision for such methods of administration for
the program as are found by the responsible Department official to give reasonable assurance
that the applicant and all recipients of Federal financial assistance under such program will
comply with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this Directive. In cases of continuing
State programs in which applications are not made, the extension of Federal financial assistance
shall be subject to the same conditions under this paragraph as if applications had been made.

     6.3. Assurances from Institutions

           6.3.1. In the case of Federal financial assistance to an institution of higher education,
the assurance required by this section shall extend to admission practices and to all other
practices relating to the treatment of students.

           6.3.2. The assurance required with respect to an institution of higher education, or any
other institution, insofar as the assurance relates to the institution's practices with respect to
admission or other treatment of individuals as students of the institution or to the opportunity to


                                                  7
                                                                      DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


participate in the provision of services or other benefits to such individuals, shall be applicable to
the entire institution unless the applicant establishes, to the satisfaction of the responsible
Department official, that the institution's practices in designated parts or programs of the
institution will in no way affect its practices in the program of the institution for which Federal
financial assistance is sought, or the beneficiaries of or participants in such program. If in any
such case the assistance sought is for the construction of a facility or part of a facility, the
assurance shall in any event extend to the entire facility and to facilities operated in connection
therewith.

     6.4. Elementary and Secondary Schools. The requirement of paragraph 6.1., 6.2., or 6.3.,
above, with respect to any elementary or secondary school or school system shall be deemed to
be satisfied if such school or school system:

          6.4.1. Is subject to a final order of a court of the United States for the desegregation of
such school or school system, and provides an assurance that it will comply with such order,
including any future modification of such order; or

           6.4.2. Submits a plan for the desegregation of such school or school system that the
responsible official of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare determines is adequate
to accomplish the purposes of the Act and this Directive, and provides reasonable assurance that
it will carry out such plan; in any case of continuing Federal financial assistance the said
Department officer may reserve the right to redetermine, after such period as may be specified by
him, the adequacy of the plan to accomplish the purpose of the Act or this Directive within the
earliest practicable time. In any case in which a final order of a court of the United States for the
desegregation of such school or school system is entered after submission of such a plan, such
plan shall be revised to conform to such final order, including any future modification of said
order.


7. COMPLIANCE INFORMATION

     7.1. Cooperation and Assistance. Each responsible Department official shall to the fullest
extent practicable seek the cooperation of recipients in obtaining compliance with this Directive
and shall provide assistance and guidance to recipients to help them comply voluntarily with this
Directive.

     7.2. Compliance Reports. Each recipient shall keep such records and submit to the
responsible Department official timely, complete and accurate compliance reports at such times,
and in such form and containing such information, as the responsible Department official may
determine to be necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the recipient has complied or is
complying with this Directive. In general, recipients should have available for the Department
racial and ethnic data showing the extent to which members of minority groups are beneficiaries
of federally assisted programs. In the case of any program under which a primary recipient
extends Federal financial assistance to any other recipient, such other recipient shall also submit



                                                  8
                                                                      DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


such compliance reports to the primary recipient as may be necessary to enable the primary
recipient to carry out its obligations imposed pursuant to this Directive.

      7.3. Access to Sources of Information. Each recipient shall permit access by the
responsible Department official during normal business hours to such of its books, records,
accounts, and other sources of information, and its facilities as may be pertinent to ascertain
compliance with this Directive. Where any information required of a recipient is in the exclusive
possession of any other institution or person and this institution or person shall fail or refuse to
furnish this information, the recipient shall so certify in its report and shall set forth what efforts
it has made to obtain the information.

      7.4. Information to Beneficiaries and Participants. Each recipient shall make available to
participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons such information regarding the provisions
of this Directive and its applicability to the program under which the recipient receives Federal
financial assistance, and make such information available to them in such manner, as the
responsible Department official finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against
discrimination assured them by the Act and this Directive.


8. CONDUCT OF INVESTIGATIONS

     8.1. Periodic Compliance Reviews. The responsible Department official or his designee(s)
shall from time to time review the practices of recipients to determine whether they are
complying with this Directive.

      8.2. Complaints. Any person who believes himself or any specific class of individuals to
be subjected to discrimination prohibited by this Directive may by himself or by a representative
file with the responsible Department official a written complaint. A complaint must be filed not
later than 180 days from the date of the alleged discrimination, unless the time for filing is
extended by the responsible Department official.

      8.3. Investigations. The responsible Department official will make a prompt investigation
whenever a compliance review, report, complaint, or any other information indicates a possible
failure to comply with this Directive. The investigation should include, where appropriate, a
review of the pertinent practices and policies of the recipient, the circumstances under which the
possible noncompliance with this Directive occurred, and other factors relevant to a
determination of whether the recipient has failed to comply with this Directive.

     8.4. Resolution of Matters

           8.4.1. If an investigation pursuant to paragraph 8.3. indicates a failure to comply with
this Directive, the responsible Department official will so inform the recipient and the matter will
be resolved by informal means whenever possible. If it has been determined that the matter
cannot be resolved by informal means, action will be taken as provided in section 9. of this
Directive.


                                                  9
                                                                     DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


          8.4.2. If an investigation does not warrant action pursuant to subparagraph 8.4.1., the
responsible Department official will so inform the recipient and the complainant, if any, in
writing.

     8.5. Intimidatory or Retaliatory Acts Prohibited. No recipient or other person shall
intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering
with any right or privilege secured by section 601 of the Act or this Directive, or because he has
made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation,
proceeding, or hearing under this Directive. The identity of complainants shall not be disclosed
except when necessary to carry out the purposes of this Directive, including the conduct of any
investigation, hearing or judicial proceeding arising thereunder.


9. PROCEDURE FOR EFFECTING COMPLIANCE

     9.1. General. If there appears to be a failure or threatened failure to comply with this
Directive, and if the noncompliance or threatened noncompliance cannot be corrected by
informal means, compliance with this Directive may be effected by the suspension or termination
of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance or by any other means authorized
by law as determined by the responsible Department official. Such other means may include, but
are not limited to:

          9.1.1. A reference to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that
appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the United States under any law of
the United States (including other titles of the Act), or any assurance or other contractual
undertaking; and

          9.1.2. Any applicable proceedings under State or local law.

     9.2. Noncompliance with Section 6. If an applicant fails or refuses to furnish an assurance
required under section 6., or otherwise fails or refuses to comply with a requirement imposed by
or pursuant to that section, Federal financial assistance may be refused in accordance with the
procedures of paragraph 9.3. of this section. The component of the Department of Defense
concerned shall not be required to provide assistance in such a case during the pendency of the
administrative proceedings under such paragraph except that the component shall continue
assistance during the pendency of such proceedings where such assistance is due and payable
pursuant to an application therefore approved prior to the effective date of this Directive.

     9.3. Termination of or Refusal to Grant or to Continue Federal Financial Assistance.
Except as provided in paragraph 9.2. no order suspending, terminating or refusing to grant or
continue Federal financial assistance shall become effective until:

           9.3.1. The responsible Department official has advised the applicant or recipient of his
failure to comply and has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means;



                                                10
                                                                       DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


           9.3.2. There has been an express finding, after opportunity for a hearing (as provided
in section 10 of this Directive), of a failure by the applicant or recipient to comply with a
requirement imposed by or pursuant to this Directive;

           9.3.3. The action has been approved by the Secretary of Defense pursuant to section
11. of this Directive; and

           9.3.4. The expiration of 30 days after the Secretary of Defense has filed with the
committee of the House and the committee of the Senate having legislative jurisdiction over the
program involved, a full written report of the circumstances and the grounds for such action.
Any action to suspend or terminate or to refuse to grant or to continue Federal financial
assistance shall be limited to the particular political entity, or part thereof, or other applicant or
recipient as to whom such a finding has been made and shall be limited in its effect to the
particular program, or part thereof, in which such noncompliance has been so found.

     9.4. Other Means Authorized by Law. No action to affect compliance by any other means
authorized by law shall be taken until:

         9.4.1. The responsible Department official has determined that compliance cannot be
secured by voluntary means;

         9.4.2. The action has been approved by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower
and Reserve Affairs);

          9.4.3. The recipient or other person has been notified of its failure to comply and of
the action to be taken to effect compliance; and

           9.4.4. The expiration of at least 10 days from the mailing of such notice to the
recipient or other person. During this period of at least 10 days additional efforts shall be made
to persuade the recipient or other person to comply with this Directive and to take such
corrective action as may be appropriate.


10. HEARINGS

     10.1. Opportunity for Hearing. Whenever an opportunity for a hearing is required by
section 9. of this Directive, reasonable notice shall be given by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the affected applicant or recipient. This notice shall advise the applicant or
recipient of the action proposed to be taken, the specific provision under which the proposed
action against it is to be taken, and the matters of fact or law asserted as the basis for this action,
and either:

          10.1.1. Fix a date not less than 20 days after the date of such notice within which the
applicant or recipient may request of the responsible Department official that the matter be
scheduled for hearing; or


                                                  11
                                                                      DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


          10.1.2. Advise the applicant or recipient that the matter in question has been set down
for hearing at a stated place and time. The time and place so fixed shall be reasonable and shall
be subject to change for cause. The complainant, if any, shall be advised of the time and place of
hearing. An applicant or recipient may waive a hearing and submit written information and
argument. The failure of an applicant or recipient to request a hearing under this paragraph or to
appear at a hearing for which a date has been set shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to a
hearing under Section 602 of the Act and paragraph 9.3. of this Directive and consent to the
making of a decision on the basis of such information as is available.

     10.2. Time and Place of Hearing. Hearings shall be held at the offices of the responsible
component of the Department of Defense in Washington, DC at a time fixed by the responsible
Department official unless he determines that the convenience of the applicant or recipient or of
the component requires that another place be selected. Hearings shall be held before the
responsible Department official or, at his discretion, before a hearing examiner designated by
him.

     10.3. Hearing Examiner. The examiner shall be a field grade officer or civilian employee
above the grade of GS-12 (or the equivalent) who shall be a person admitted to practice law
before a Federal court or the highest court of a State.

     10.4. Right to Counsel. In all proceedings under this section, the applicant or recipient and
the responsible component of the Department shall have the right to be represented by counsel.

     10.5. Procedures

           10.5.1. The recipient shall receive an open hearing at which he or his counsel may
examine any witnesses present. Both the responsible Department official and the applicant or
recipient shall be entitled to introduce all relevant evidence on the issues as stated in the notice
for hearing or as determined by the officer conducting the hearing at the outset of or during the
hearing.

          10.5.2. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted pursuant to
this Directive, but rules or principles designed to assure production of the most credible evidence
available and to subject testimony to test by cross-examination shall be applied where reasonably
necessary by the officer conducting the hearing. The hearing officer may exclude irrelevant,
immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. All documents and other evidence offered or taken
for record shall be open to examination by the parties and opportunity shall be given to refute
facts and arguments advanced on either side of the issues. A transcript shall be made of the oral
evidence except to the extent the substance thereof is stipulated for the record. All decisions
shall be based upon the hearing record and written findings shall be made.

     10.6. Consolidated or Joint Hearings. In cases in which the same or related facts are
asserted to constitute noncompliance with this Directive with respect to two or more programs to
which this Directive applies, or noncompliance with this Directive and the regulations of one or
more other Federal Departments or Agencies issued under Title VI of the Act, the Assistant


                                                  12
                                                                      DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


Secretary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs), the Secretary of a Military Department,
or other responsible Department official designated by the Assistant Secretary of Defense
(Manpower and Reserve Affairs) after consultation with the Assistant Secretary of Defense
(Manpower and Reserve Affairs) may, by agreement with such other Departments or Agencies
where applicable, provide for the conduct of consolidated or joint hearings, and for the
application to such hearings of appropriate procedures not inconsistent with this Directive. Final
decisions in such cases, insofar as this Directive is concerned, shall be made in accordance with
section 11.


11. DECISIONS AND NOTICES

      11.1. Decision by Person Other Than the Responsible Department Official. If the hearing
is held by a hearing examiner such hearing examiner shall either make an initial decision, if so
authorized, or certify the entire record including his recommended findings and proposed
decision to the responsible Department official for a final decision, and a copy of such initial
decision or certification shall be mailed to the applicant or recipient. Where the initial decision
is made by the hearing examiner the applicant or recipient may within 30 days of the mailing of
such notice of initial decision file with the responsible Department official his exceptions to the
initial decision, with his reasons therefor. In the absence of exceptions, the responsible
Department official may on his own motion within 45 days after the initial decision serve on the
applicant or recipient a notice that he will review the decision. Upon the filing of such
exceptions or of such notice of review the responsible Department official shall review the initial
decision and issue his own decision thereon including the reasons therefore. In the absence of
either exceptions or a notice of review the initial decision shall constitute the final decision of the
responsible Department official.

      11.2. Decisions on Record or Review by the Responsible Department Official. Whenever a
record is certified to the responsible Department official for decision or he reviews the decision
of a hearing examiner pursuant to paragraph 11.1. or whenever the responsible Department
official conducts the hearing, the applicant or recipient shall be given reasonable opportunity to
file with him briefs or other written statements of its contentions, and a copy of the final decision
of the responsible Department official shall be given in writing to the applicant or recipient and
to the complainant, if any.

     11.3. Decisions on Record Where a Hearing is Waived. Whenever a hearing is waived
pursuant to paragraph 10.1. a decision shall be made by the responsible Department official on
the record and a copy of such decision shall be given in writing to the applicant or recipient, and
to the complainant, if any.

      11.4. Rulings Required. Each decision of a hearing officer or responsible Department
official shall set forth his ruling on each finding, conclusion, or exception presented, and shall
identify the requirement or requirements imposed by or pursuant to this Directive with which it
is found that the applicant or recipient has failed to comply.



                                                  13
                                                                     DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


     11.5. Approval by the Secretary of Defense. Any final decision of a responsible
Department official which provides for the suspension or termination of, or the refusal to grant or
continue Federal financial assistance, or the imposition of any other sanction available under this
Directive or the Act, shall promptly be transmitted to the Secretary of Defense, who may
approve such decision, may vacate it, or remit or mitigate any sanction imposed.

     11.6. Contents of Orders. The final decision may provide for suspension or termination of,
or refusal to grant or continue Federal financial assistance, in whole or in part, under the program
involved, and may contain such terms, conditions, and other provisions as are consistent with
and will effectuate the purposes of the Act and this Directive, including provisions designed to
assure that no Federal financial assistance will thereafter be extended under such program to the
applicant or recipient determined by such decision to be in default in its performance of an
assurance given by it pursuant to this Directive, or to have otherwise failed to comply with this
Directive, unless and until it corrects its noncompliance and satisfies the responsible Department
official that it will fully comply with this Directive.

     11.7. Post-termination Proceedings

           11.7.1. An applicant or recipient adversely affected by an order issued under
paragraph 11.6. shall be restored to full eligibility to receive Federal financial assistance if it
satisfies the terms and conditions of that order for such eligibility or it brings itself into
compliance with this Directive and provides reasonable assurance that it will fully comply with
this Directive.

            11.7.2. Any applicant or recipient adversely affected by an order entered pursuant to
paragraph 11.6., above, may at any time request the responsible Department official to restore
fully its eligibility to receive Federal financial assistance. Any such request shall be supported
by information showing that the applicant or recipient has met the requirements of subparagraph
11.7.1., above. If the responsible Department official determines that those requirements have
been satisfied, he shall restore such eligibility.

           11.7.3. If the responsible Department official denies any such request, the applicant or
recipient may submit a request for a hearing in writing, specifying why it believes such official
to have been in error. It shall thereupon be given an expeditious hearing, with a decision on the
record, in accordance with rules of procedure issued by the responsible Department official. The
applicant or recipient will be restored to such eligibility if it proves at such a hearing that it
satisfied the requirements of subparagraph 11.7.1., above. While proceedings under this
paragraph are pending, the sanctions imposed by the order issued under paragraph 11.6. shall
remain in effect.


12. JUDICIAL REVIEW

Action taken pursuant to Section 602 of the Act is subject to judicial review as provided in
Section 603 of the Act.


                                                 14
                                                                     DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971




13. EFFECT ON OTHER ISSUANCES

     13.1. All issuances heretofore issued by any officer of the Department of Defense or its
components that impose requirements designed to prohibit any discrimination against individuals
on the ground of race, color, or national origin under any program to which this Directive
applies, and which authorize the suspension or termination of or refusal to grant or to continue
Federal financial assistance to any applicant for or recipient of such assistance under such
program for failure to comply with such requirements, are hereby superseded to the extent that
such discrimination is prohibited by this Directive, except that nothing in this Directive shall be
deemed to relieve any person of any obligation assumed or imposed under any such superseded
regulation, order, instruction, or like direction prior to the effective date of this Directive.

     13.2. Nothing in this Directive, however, shall be deemed to supersede any of the following
(including future amendments thereof):

          13.2.1. Executive Orders 10925, 11114, and 11246 and issuances thereunder;

           13.2.2. The "Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration," issued
jointly by the Secretaries of Defense, of Health, Education and Welfare, and of Labor, 28 F.R.
734; or

           13.2.3. Executive Order 11063 and issuances thereunder, or any other issuances,
insofar as such Order or issuances prohibit discrimination on the ground of race, color, or
national origin in any program or situation to which this Directive is inapplicable, or prohibit
discrimination on any other ground.


14. IMPLEMENTATION

The Secretary of each Military Department shall submit regulations implementing this Directive
to the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs).


15. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1.

The changes to this issuance are administrative and update organizational titles and references
for accuracy.




                                                 15
                                                                    DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


16. EFFECTIVE DATE AND CANCELLATION

This Directive shall become effective on the 30th day following the date of its publication in the
Federal Register. DoD Directive 5500.11, December 28, 1964 is superseded and canceled.




Enclosures - 1
  E1. Federal Financial Assistance to Which This Directive Applies




                                                16
                                                                   DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


                                      E1. ENCLOSURE 1

      FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO WHICH THIS DIRECTIVE APPLIES



     E1.1.1. The Army and Air National Guard (Title 32, United States Code).

     E1.1.2. Various programs involving loan or other disposition of surplus property (various
general and specialized statutory provisions including: 40 United States Code 483, 484, 512; 49
United States Code 1101 - 1119; 10 United States Code 2541, 2542, 2543, 2572, 2662, 7308,
7541, 7542, 7545, 7546, 7547).

    E1.1.3. National Program for Promotion of Rifle Practice (10 United States Code 4307 and
annual Department of Defense Appropriation Act).

     E1.1.4. National Defense Cadet Corps Program (10 United States Code 3540(b), 4651).

     E1.1.5. Office of Civil Defense assistance to programs of adult education in civil defense
subjects (50 United States Code App. 2281(e), (f)).

    E1.1.6. Office of Civil Defense radiological instruments grants (50 United States Code
App. 2281 (h)).

     E1.1.7. Office of Civil Defense program (with Public Health Service) for development of
instructional materials on medical self-help (50 United States Code App. 2281(e), (f)).

      E1.1.8. Office of Civil Defense university extension programs for civil defense instructor
training (50 United States Code App. 2281 (e)).

      E1.1.9. Office of Civil Defense programs for survival supplies and equipment, survival
training, emergency operating center construction, and personnel and administrative expenses
(50 United States Code App. 2281 (i), 2285).

    E1.1.10. Office of Civil Defense Shelter Provisioning Program (50 United States Code
App. 2281(h)).

    E1.1.11. Office of Civil Defense assistance to students attending Office of Civil Defense
schools (50 United States Code App. 2281(e)).

      E1.1.12. Office of Civil Defense loans of equipment or materials from OCD stockpiles for
civil defense, including local disaster purposes (50 United States Code App. 2281).

     E1.1.13. Navy Science Cruiser Program (Sec Nav Instruction 5720. 19A).



                                                17                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDD 5500.11, May 27, 1971


     E1.1.14. Civil Air Patrol (10 United States Code 9441).

     E1.1.15. Research grants made under the authority of Public Law 85-934 (42 U.S.C. 1892).

     E1.1.16. Contracts with nonprofit institutions of higher education or with nonprofit
organizations whose primary purpose is the conduct of scientific research, wherein title to
equipment purchased with funds under such contracts may be vested in such institutions or
organizations under the authority of Public Law 85-934 (42 U.S.C. 1891).

    E1.1.17. Army Corps of Engineers participation in cooperative investigations and studies
concerning erosion of shores of coastal and lake waters (33 United States Code 426).

     E1.1.18. Army Corps of Engineers assistance in the construction of works for the
restoration and protection of shores and beaches (33 United States Code 426 e-h).

     E1.1.19. Public park and recreational facilities at water resource development projects
under the administrative jurisdiction of the Department of the Army (16 United States Code 460d
and Federal Water Project Recreation Act, Public Law 89-72, 79 Stat. 218, July 9, 1965).

     E1.1.20. Payment to States of proceeds of lands acquired by the United States for flood
control, navigation, and allied purposes (33 United States Code 701-c-3).

     E1.1.21. Grants of easements without consideration, or at a nominal or reduced
consideration, on lands under the control of the Department of the Army at water resource
development projects. (33 United States Code 558c and 702 d-1; 10 United States Code 2668
and 2669; 43 United States Code 961; 40 United States Code 319).

     E1.1.22. Army Corps of Engineers assistance in the construction of small boat harbor
projects (33 United States Code 540 and 577, and 47 Stat. 42, February 10, 1932).

     E1.1.23. Emergency bank protection works constructed by the Army Corps of Engineers
for protection of highways, bridge approaches, and public works (33 United States Code 701r).

    E1.1.24. Assistance to States and local interests in the development of water supplies for
municipal and industrial purposes in connection with Army Corps of Engineers reservoir projects
(Water Supply Act of 1958, 43 United States Code 390b).

      E1.1.25. Army Corps of Engineers contracts for remedial works under authority of Section
III of Act of July 3, 1958 (33 United States Code 633).




                                               18                               ENCLOSURE 1
