                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 3003.01
                                                                             September 26, 2011
                                                           Incorporating Change 1, May 12, 2017

                                                                                           USD(P)

SUBJECT:      DoD Support to Civil Search and Rescue (SAR)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 3003.01 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction in
accordance with the authority in DoDD 5111.1 and Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum
(References (b) and (c)).

   b. Establishes policies and assigns responsibilities for DoD civil SAR activities in
accordance with References (d) through (i), and is consistent with Reference (j).

   c. Incorporates and cancels Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (k)) and DoD
Directive-Type Memorandum 08-021 (Reference (l)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. DoD shall support domestic civil authorities providing civil SAR services to the fullest
extent practicable on a non-interference basis with primary military duties according to
applicable national directives, plans, guidelines, and agreements, pursuant to the authority in and
in accordance with the provisions of References (f) and (h), if applicable.
                                                               DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011



   b. In the event of an incident of significant magnitude or associated with a Presidential
declaration of a disaster or emergency, DoD shall respond to requests for assistance from the
Secretary of Homeland Security or other designated Federal or State officials, consistent with
Reference (j) and (e) and in accordance with section 5121 et seq. of title 42, United States Code
(U.S.C.) (Reference (m)).

    c. All SAR operations conducted in support of domestic civil authorities prior to a
Presidential declaration of a disaster or emergency shall respond to requests for assistance from
the Secretary of Homeland Security or other designated Federal or State officials consistent with
Reference (j) and in accordance with section 1535 of title 31, U.S.C. (Reference (n)).

    d. DoD, consistent with its capabilities and authority under applicable law and regulations,
shall:

        (1) Support foreign civil authorities performing civil SAR operations in territory and
international waters beyond recognized U.S. aeronautical and maritime search and rescue regions
(SRRs) consistent with U.S. obligations under international agreements.

        (2) Provide assistance to persons, ships, and aircraft in distress in accordance with U.S.
and international law and applicable regulations (e.g., article 12 of the United Nations
Convention on the High Seas (Reference (o))).

     (3) Follow the civil SAR standards and procedures in References (e) through (j) to the
maximum extent possible when supporting civil SAR activities.

    e. DoD emergency beacons that are search and rescue satellite-aided tracking (SARSAT)
system compliant or type approved will comply with U.S. national guidance.

         (1) All DoD 406 megahertz (MHz) SARSAT emergency beacons will transmit a unique
digital identifier. All 406 MHz beacons shall be configured to include standardized DoD coding
and operated and maintained to ensure effective use.

        (2) A DoD SARSAT beacon registration database is required for DoD use of 406 MHz
beacons; this database shall be developed, maintained, and kept current as set forth in paragraph
6.c. of Enclosure 2 of this Instruction.

    f. DoD recognizes that State and local authorities are responsible for land based SAR and
have a person to be SAR coordinator within their respective jurisdictions. State SAR
coordinators are integral partners of the national SAR system and are critical to providing
effective civil SAR services (Reference (f)).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.




Change 1, 05/12/2017                             2
                                                        DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective September 26, 2011.




                                            Michèle A. Flournoy
                                            Under Secretary of Defense for Policy

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 05/12/2017                        3
                                                                     DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011


                                             ENCLOSURE 1

                                              REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 3003.01, “DoD Support to Civil Search and Rescue (SAR),” January 20,
      2006 (hereby cancelled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” December 8,
      1999
(c)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,” November 30,
      2006
(d)   DoD Directive 3002.01, “Personnel Recovery in the Department of Defense,” April 16,
      2009, as amended
(e)   DoD Directive 3025.18, “Defense Support of Civil Authorities,” December 29, 2010, as
      amended
(f)   Secretaries of the Departments of Defense, Interior, and Transportation; Administrator of
      the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; and Chair of the Federal
      Communications Commission; “National Search and Rescue Plan of the United States,”
      January 2007, as amended 1
(g)   United Nations International Maritime Organization, “International Aeronautical and
      Maritime Search and Rescue Manual,” current edition 2
(h)   National Search and Rescue Committee, “United States National Search and Rescue
      Supplement to the International Aeronautical and Maritime Search and Rescue Manual,”
      current edition 3
(i)   National Search and Rescue Committee, “Catastrophic Incident Search and Rescue
      Addendum to the National Search and Rescue Supplement to the International Aeronautical
      and Maritime Search and Rescue Manual Version 2.0,” current edition 4
(j)   Department of Homeland Security, “National Response Framework,” January 2008
(k)   Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Designation as Inland Search and Rescue
      Coordinator,” November 4, 2009 (hereby cancelled)
(l)   Directive-Type Memorandum 08-021, “DoD Use of the Civil Search and Rescue Satellite-
      aided Tracking (SARSAT) System for Support to Personnel Recovery,” October 17, 2008
      (hereby cancelled)
(m)   Section 5121 et seq. of title 42, United States Code 5
(n)   Sections 1535 and 1536 of title 31, United States Code 6
(o)   Article 12 of the United Nations Convention on the High Seas, April 29, 1958
(p)   DoD Directive 5111.13, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and
      Americas’ Security Affairs (ASD(HD&ASA)),” January 16, 2009
(q)   DoD Directive 5530.3, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987, as amended



1
  Available on the Internet at http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/cg534/manuals/Natl_SAR_Plan(2007).pdf
2
  Available on the Internet at http://www.imo.org/
3
  Available on the Internet at http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/cg534/manuals/Natl_SAR_Supp.pdf
4
  Available on the Internet at http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/cg534/nsarc/CISAddendum2.0_Nov09.pdf
5
  Also known as “The Stafford Act”
6
  Also know as “The Economy Act”


Change 1, 05/12/2017                                  4                                    ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011


(r)   Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “Dictionary of Military and Associated
      Terms,” current edition




Change 1, 05/12/2017                            5                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                            DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011


                                       ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall serve as
the principal civilian advisor to the Secretary of Defense on civil SAR.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND DEFENSE AND GLOBAL
SECURITY (ASD(HD&GS)). The ASD(HD&GS), under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(P), shall:

    a. Provide advice to and coordinate with the USD(P) on domestic civil SAR as appropriate,
including as it constitutes Defense Support of Civil Authorities (DSCA).

    b. Provide recommendations to the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P) regarding DSCA
as set forth in section 4 of DoDD 5111.13 (Reference (p)), including domestic civil SAR.


3. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PRISONER OF WAR/MISSING
PERSONNEL AFFAIRS (DASD(POW/MPA)). The DASD(POW/MPA), under the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(P), shall:

   a. Provide policy oversight for DoD support to civil SAR.

    b. Represent the DoD on the National Search and Rescue Committee (NSARC) and at
relevant interagency and international forums on civil SAR matters.

    c. Chair the DoD Civil SAR Working Group for coordinating NSARC initiatives that affect
the DoD.

    d. Oversee the negotiation and coordination of international civil SAR agreements involving
the DoD Components; coordinate with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the General
Counsel of the Department of Defense (GC, DoD), the Department of State Assistant Legal
Adviser for Treaty Affairs, and the Commandant, United States Coast Guard (USCG), on such
agreements.

    e. Oversee Combatant Command security cooperation strategies and plans in coordination
with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to ensure consistency in civil SAR activities as
they pertain to Combatant Command regional objectives and priorities, and to ensure consistency
with DoD security cooperation guidance and relevant U.S. obligations and policies in accordance
with subparagraph 4.d.(1) in the policy section of this Instruction.




Change 1, 05/12/2017                           6                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011


    f. Coordinate the development of DoD civil SAR guidance or other measures to implement
this Instruction with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Heads of the OSD and
DoD Components with civil SAR responsibilities, as appropriate.


4. CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (DoD CIO). The DoD CIO shall:

   a. Designate a representative to the NSARC Research and Development (R&D) Working
Group to facilitate close coordination with the DASD(POW/MPA) on NSARC R&D Working
Group initiatives.

    b. Provide technical advice and other assistance to the DASD(POW/MPA), as appropriate,
to assist the Military Departments in supporting NSARC R&D Working Group initiatives within
the responsibilities of the DoD, and to improve DoD support to civil SAR in coordination with
the ASD(HD&GS).

    c. When possible, support civil agency efforts to improve the capabilities of communications
and information management systems, and of personnel location and identification technologies,
for civil SAR.


5. GC, DoD. The GC, DoD, shall oversee the legal review of all international civil SAR
agreements involving the Secretary of Defense or the DoD Components.


6. SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. The Secretary of the Air Force shall:

    a. Designate a civil SAR expert to serve, in close coordination with the DASD(POW/MPA),
as a member of the Joint Search and Rescue Working Group that the International Civil Aviation
Organization and the International Maritime Organization sponsor jointly.

   b. Continue to provide appropriate instructor staff for the National Search and Rescue
School for resident and field training in the areas of aeronautical and land SAR.

    c. Develop, maintain, and sustain 24-hour operation of Joint SARSAT Electronic Tracking
System, a component of the Personnel Recovery Mission Software, ensuring its continuous
availability to users and responder organizations, including maintaining the currency of the
system’s underlying software and web-enabled features and adequate system back-up and
mirroring.

    d. Provide funding, manpower, and personnel services to operate fully functional Rescue
Coordination Centers (RCCs) to promote efficient organization of SAR services, and to
coordinate the conduct of civil SAR operations within the inland U.S. SRRs corresponding to the
48 contiguous States and Alaska, in accordance with the guidance in References (f) through (j),
and consistent with the guidance in Reference (e).




Change 1, 05/12/2017                           7                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011



7. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:

   a. Provide a representative as required for the DoD Civil SAR Working Group.

   b. In coordination with DASD(POW/MPA), oversee Combatant Command security
cooperation strategies and plans in accordance with paragraph 3.e. of this enclosure.


8. COMMANDERS OF THE GEOGRAPHIC COMBATANT COMMANDS. The
Commanders of the Geographic Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, as appropriate:

    a. Shall, consistent with legal authority and on a non-interference basis with their primary
military duties in accordance with subparagraph 4.d.(1) in the policy section of this Instruction:

        (1) Be knowledgeable of civil SAR responsibilities assigned to other U.S. and foreign
civil and military authorities to ensure that Combatant Command civil SAR agreements support,
and do not supplant, those authorities.

       (2) Perform civil SAR functions such as training, exercises, and liaison with other
nations, and coordinate activities with the Chief, Office of SAR, USCG Headquarters, to ensure:

           (a) Consistency with U.S. obligations under international agreements to which the
United States is a party.

          (b) Compliance with Reference (h) and other international guidance relevant to
implementing such agreements.

           (c) Compatibility with USCG international civil SAR objectives and activities.

         (3) Review security cooperation strategies and plans to ensure consistency in civil SAR
activities as they pertain to their respective Command regional objectives and priorities, and to
ensure consistency with DoD security cooperation guidance and relevant U.S. obligations and
policies.

        (4) Ensure that security cooperation plans properly account for any existing or planned
civil SAR agreements, and for relevant results of past international security cooperation activities
(e.g., SAR training or exercises).

      (5) Provide copies of any concluded international agreements to the GC, DoD, and the
Department of State Assistant Legal Advisor for Treaty Affairs.




Change 1, 05/12/2017                             8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011


        (6) Conduct civil SAR operations and effect international security cooperation activities
that pertain to civil SAR consistent with the scope of their respective functional or geographic
responsibilities, expertise, capabilities, and legal authority.

    b. May, consistent with applicable authorities, including DoDD 5530.3 (Reference (q)),
negotiate and conclude, as appropriate, civil SAR agreements as a security cooperation strategy
and planning tool within their respective geographic areas of responsibility (AORs) when such
agreements:

       (1) Provide a mutual humanitarian benefit.

       (2) Are fully consistent with the civil SAR functional responsibilities of DoD in
Reference (g), which varies geographically, and with the responsibilities of any other party to the
agreement.

       (3) Are fully consistent with relevant provisions of References (e) through (j) and are
coordinated with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; the GC, DoD; the
DASD(POW/MPA); the respective Chief of Mission; and the Chief, Office of SAR, USCG
Headquarters.

      (4) Are fully consistent with any other treaties or agreements to which the U.S.
Government or its agencies are party, including those that pertain to civil SAR.

   c. Shall not accept the role of SAR coordinator or director of an RCC for civil SAR
operations in SRRs for which other nations are responsible. However, they may support civil
SAR operations in such areas in any of these situations:

       (1) A recognized civil SAR authority requests assistance.

       (2) U.S. citizens are involved outside of the U.S. and its territories.

        (3) A DoD command or organization becomes aware of a distress situation to which no
other suitable facilities are responding, or in which other available civil SAR services appear to
be inadequate.


9. COMMANDER, UNITED STATES NORTHERN COMMAND (CDRUSNORTHCOM).
The CDRUSNORTHCOM, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as appropriate,
and in addition to the responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Serve as the U.S. Inland SAR coordinator for the provision of civil SAR services in the
area associated with the internationally recognized U.S. SRRs corresponding to the 48
contiguous States, in accordance with the guidance in References (e) through (i), and consistent
with the guidance in Reference (j).




Change 1, 05/12/2017                             9                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                            DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011


   b. Designate a civil SAR expert to provide operational advice to NSARC in close
coordination with the DASD(POW/MPA).

   c. Provide a representative as required for the DoD Civil SAR Working Group.

    d. Serve as DoD lead in the United States Northern Command AOR for matters pertaining to
planning and operation of Emergency Support Function # 9 (ESF #9), consistent with
Reference (j).


10. COMMANDER, UNITED STATES PACIFIC COMMAND (CDRUSPACOM). The
CDRUSPACOM, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as appropriate, and in
addition to the responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Serve as the U.S. SAR coordinator for the provision of civil SAR services in the area
associated with the internationally recognized U.S. SRRs corresponding to mainland Alaska, in
accordance with the guidance in References (e) through (j).

   b. Designate a civil SAR expert to provide operational advice to NSARC in close
coordination with the DASD(POW/MPA).

   c. Provide a representative as required for the DoD Civil SAR Working Group.

    d. Serve as DoD lead in the United States Pacific Command AOR for matters pertaining to
planning and operation of ESF #9, consistent with Reference (j).




Change 1, 05/12/2017                          10                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011


                                         GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AOR                     area of responsibility
ASD(HD&GS)              Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
                        Security

CDRUSNORTHCOM Commander, United States Northern Command
CDRUSPACOM    Commander, United States Pacific Command


DASD(POW/MPA)           Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Prisoner of War/Missing
                        Personnel Affairs
DoD CIO                 DoD Chief Information Officer
DoDD                    DoD Directive
DSCA                    Defense Support of Civil Authorities

ESF                     emergency support function

GC, DoD                 General Counsel of the Department of Defense


MHz                     megahertz

NSARC                   National Search and Rescue Committee


RCC                     Rescue Coordination Center
R&D                     research and development

SAR                     search and rescue
SARSAT                  search and rescue satellite-aided tracking
SRR                     search and rescue region

U.S.C.                  United States Code
USCG                    United States Coast Guard
USD(P)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Policy




Change 1, 05/12/2017                          11                                 GLOSSARY
                                                              DoDI 3003.01, September 26, 2011


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS


The international and interagency civil SAR terms and definitions provided in References (f) and
(g) shall be used in connection with conducting or supporting civil SAR operations. These terms
may differ from similar terms and definitions used for other DoD missions as provided in the
DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference (r)). Other terms used in this
issuance are defined in Reference (r).

civil SAR. Search and rescue operations in the air, on the land, and on the water to assist persons
and protect life in a permissive environment. Examples of these rescue scenarios include, but are
not limited to, downed aviators, stranded sportsmen, lost boaters, and mass rescue operations. It
is DoD policy to support RCC requests for civil SAR, and DoD forces will fund their own
activities without allowing cost reimbursement to delay response to any person in danger or
distress.




Change 1, 05/12/2017                            12                                   GLOSSARY
