                                 Department of Defense
                               INSTRUCTION
                                                                     NUMBER 3100.12
                                                                       September 14, 2000

                                                                                ASD(C3I)

SUBJECT: Space Support

References: (a) PDD-NSC-49/NSTC-8, "National Space Policy," September 14, 1996
            (b) PDD-NSTC-4, "National Space Transportation Policy," August 5,
                1994
            (c) DoD Directive 3100.10, "Space Policy," July 9, 1999
            (d) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, "Department of Defense Policy
                on the Use of Former Soviet Union Propulsion in Space Launch
                Vehicles," May 17, 1995 (hereby superseded)
            (e) through (o), see enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE:

This Instruction:

     1.1. Implements policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes guidelines and
procedures regarding the space support mission area, in accordance with references (a)
through (c); and

    1.2. Supersedes references (d) and (e).


2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant
Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the
Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within
the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as "the DoD
Components").

                                              1
                                                                             DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000




3. DEFINITION

Space Support. Combat service support operations to deploy and sustain military and
intelligence systems in space. The space support mission area includes launching and
deploying space vehicles, maintaining and sustaining spacecraft on-orbit, and
deorbiting and recovering space vehicles, if required.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy under the provisions of reference (c) that:

     4.1. The availability of critical space support capabilities necessary for executing
national security missions shall be assured, in accordance with references (a) through
(c).

     4.2. Capabilities necessary to conduct the space support mission area shall be
integrated into an operational space force structure that is sufficiently robust, ready,
secure, survivable, resilient, and interoperable to meet the needs of the National
Command Authorities, Combatant Commanders, military operational forces, and
intelligence users across the conflict spectrum, in accordance with references (a)
through (c).

     4.3. Space Transportation. The capability for responsive, reliable, flexible, and
assured access to space in peace, crisis, and through appropriate levels of conflict
commensurate with national security requirements shall be assured, in accordance with
references (a) through (c). This shall include operational capabilities to launch and
deploy space vehicles as well as de-orbit and recover space vehicles, if required.

         4.3.1. Access to space shall be provided by a mix of space launch systems
and multiple launch sites at major space support facilities to ensure that single failures
do not prevent access to space.

         4.3.2. DoD payloads shall be launched on U.S.-manufactured launch vehicles
unless specifically exempted by the President or his designated representative, in
accordance with reference (b). Such launch vehicles shall be fabricated and tested in
the United States.

         4.3.3. Use of Former Soviet Union (FSU) Propulsion Systems, Components,


                                                2
                                                                           DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000


or Technology . The use of propulsion systems, components, or technology from the
FSU shall be in conformity with obligations under arms control agreements, U.S.
non-proliferation policies, U.S. technology transfer policies, and U.S. policies
regarding observance of the Guidelines and Annex of the Missile Technology Control
Regime, in accordance with reference (d).

          4.3.4. Launch Ranges. DoD launch ranges are national assets, which shall
be sized, operated, and maintained primarily for DoD test and operational support
missions. Such ranges shall also be available to all users having a valid requirement
for such capabilities, in accordance with reference (f). The space launch
infrastructure shall be systematically modernized and enhanced consistent with mission
needs, in accordance with reference (b). Launch range safety activities shall be
conducted in accordance with references (b) and (f).

          4.3.5. Commercial Space Launch. U.S. commercial space launch services
shall be utilized to the fullest extent feasible that meet mission requirements, in
accordance with references (b) and (g). DoD support to commercial space launches
shall be provided in accordance with references (b), (h), and (i).

              4.3.5.1. State and local governments as well as private sector access to
DoD launch facilities and services, which are excess or otherwise not needed for
public use shall be facilitated and encouraged, in accordance with references (a), (h),
and (j).

               4.3.5.2. Equal opportunity for all elements of the U.S. commercial space
sector shall be provided for access to Federal launch property and services without the
use of direct Federal subsidies. Reimbursement shall be obtained from persons
authorized to acquire DoD launch property or launch services.

               4.3.5.3. Recovery of design and development costs or investments
associated with any existing facilities or new facilities required to meet U.S.
Government needs, and to which the U.S. Government retains title, shall not be sought
in the pricing structure for launch base and range use. This shall not, given
appropriate statutory authority, preclude investment in launch base and range facilities
from entities other than the U.S. Government.

             4.3.5.4. The requirements of commercial users of U.S. space launch
bases and ranges shall be actively considered and factored into decisions on operations
and improvements to the launch bases and ranges as well as the operations of the bases
and ranges. The right to use such facilities and services on a priority basis to meet


                                               3
                                                                            DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000


national security and critical civil sector mission requirements shall be reserved, in
accordance with reference (b).

              4.3.5.5. Unclassified space transportation technologies developed by the
DoD Components shall be transferred in a timely manner to the private sector in such a
way as to protect their commercial value, in accordance with references (b) and (j).

     4.4. Satellite Control Operations. The capability for responsive, reliable,
flexible, and assured satellite commanding of bus and payload, accurate tracking, and
receipt of satellite status and health in peace, crisis, and through appropriate levels of
conflict commensurate with national security requirements shall be assured, in
accordance with references (a) through (c). Satellite operations shall ensure the
preservation of space-based missions, mitigate the threat of in-space collisions,
minimize orbital debris generation, and be conducted in a safe and responsible manner
consistent with national security requirements, in accordance with reference (c).

     4.5. Nuclear Power Sources in Earth Orbit. Space nuclear power sources shall
not be used in Earth orbit without the approval of the President or his designee, in
accordance with references (a), (c), and (k).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

Under the provisions of reference (c):

    5.1. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications,
and Intelligence/Chief Information Officer (ASD(C3I)/CIO) shall:

         5.1.1. Serve as the principal staff assistant and advisor to the Secretary and
Deputy Secretary of Defense and focal point within the Department of Defense for
space support and related activities.

         5.1.2. Develop, coordinate, and oversee the implementation of policies
regarding space support, and, in coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for
Policy (USD(P)), ensure that space support policy decisions are closely integrated with
overall national security policy considerations.

          5.1.3. Oversee the development and execution of space support, related
architectures, and acquisition programs, in support of the Under Secretary of Defense
for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)).



                                               4
                                                                          DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000




          5.1.4. Coordinate requests for exemptions to launch DoD payloads on
foreign launch vehicles with the USD(AT&L), the (USD(P)), the General Counsel of
the DoD (GC, DoD), and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS).

         5.1.5. Review and coordinate all requests from within the U.S. Government
to use excess ballistic missiles to place payloads into orbit with the USD(AT&L), the
USD(P), GC, DoD, the CJCS, and, as appropriate, the Secretaries of the Military
Departments.

         5.1.6. Review and coordinate requests for national security use of the Space
Transportation System with the USD(AT&L), GC, DoD, the Under Secretary of
Defense, Comptroller (USD(C)), the CJCS, and, as appropriate, the Secretaries of the
Military Departments.

          5.1.7. Monitor all space support and related technology activities to balance
risk, cost, and potential technical gains.

          5.1.8. Serve as a focal point for space support systems and technology
integration where the interests of more than one DoD Component are involved.

        5.1.9. Prevent unwarranted duplication and ensure that space support
programs assigned to one DoD Component meet the needs of other DoD Components.

          5.1.10. Oversee the Director of the National Reconnaissance Office's
management and execution of the National Reconnaissance Program to coordinate and,
as appropriate, integrate national security satellite operations and space transportation
activities.

     5.2. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and logistics
shall:

         5.2.1. Serve as the Acquisition Executive for space support programs that are
designated Acquisition Category 1-D or designated special interest and, through the
ASD(C3I)/CIO, oversee space support and related acquisition and technology
programs.

          5.2.2. Oversee DoD space support activities to ensure that they fully comply
with arms control agreements and arrangements to which the U.S. Government is a
party in coordination with the GC, DoD, in accordance with reference (l).



                                               5
                                                                          DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000




         5.2.3. Review and approve, as appropriate, requests for limited extensions to
the conversion of FSU-produced propulsion systems, components, or technologies
when such items are used to launch DoD payloads.

         5.2.4. Review and coordinate requests by the DoD Components for use of
nuclear power sources in Earth orbit with the USD(P), the ASD(C3I)/CIO, GC, DoD,
the CJCS, and, as appropriate, the Secretaries of the Military Departments.

         5.2.5. Oversee the development and execution of space support science and
technology programs.

     5.3. The Under Secretary of Defense for Policy shall ensure that space support
policy decisions are closely integrated with overall national security policy
considerations, in coordination with the ASD(C3I)/CIO and the GC, DoD.

     5.4. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall organize, train, and equip
forces for the satellite operations mission.

          5.4.1. Review and approve use of excess ballistic missile assets by the U.S.
Government Departments and Agencies for any purpose other than to launch payloads
into orbit.

          5.4.2. The Secretary of the Department of the Air Force shall be responsible
for national security space transportation including launch and orbital operations, as
well as support for national test and evaluation operations of launch vehicles.

    5.5. The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

         5.5.1. Provide assessments of requests for exemptions to launch DoD
payloads on foreign launch vehicles.

         5.5.2. Provide assessments of requests to use excess ballistic missiles to place
payloads in orbit.

        5.5.3. Provide assessments of requests for national security use of the Space
Transportation System.

         5.5.4. Provide assessments of requests for use of nuclear power sources in
Earth orbit.



                                              6
                                                                           DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000




         5.5.5. Ensure that space support concepts and requirements are integrated, as
appropriate, into force structure assessments.

         5.5.6. Provide guidance to Commander in Chief, U.S. Space Command for
the planning and employment of space support capabilities through the joint planning
process.

         5.5.7. The Commander in Chief of U.S. Space Command shall:

             5.5.7.1. Serve as the single point of contact for military space support
operational matters, except as otherwise directed by the Secretary of Defense.

              5.5.7.2. Conduct space support operations.

              5.5.7.3. Define mission requirements for the space support mission area.

            5.5.7.4. Advocate the space support requirements of the other
Combatant Commanders.

             5.5.7.5. Assess and report on the operational impact of space support
anomalies and degradation to ensure maximum support to the warfighter.

    5.6. The Heads of the DoD Components shall ensure that their DoD Component's
space support activities fully comply with arms control agreements and arrangements
to which the U.S. Government is a party, in accordance with reference (l).


6. PROCEDURES

    6.1. Satellite Control Operations

          6.1.1. Routine satellite telemetry and commanding functions shall generally
use the same connectivity as mission data operations.

         6.1.2. Satellites shall use a combined space- and ground-based antenna
network for connectivity during launch, early orbit, anomaly resolution, optimization
of in-band commanding resource availability, and for a limited number of mission data
operations at low-data-rates.

               6.1.2.1. When practical, the satellite control network shall be a shared
subset of the assets of enduring systems.

                                               7
                                                                          DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000




               6.1.2.2. The network shall ensure accessibility to any U.S. Government
satellite in Earth orbit and to any vehicle launched from U.S. Government facilities.

             6.1.2.3. Satellite systems must meet network protocols and standards for
space-to-ground, space-to-space, and terrestrial interfaces, as applicable, in order to
use the network.

            6.1.2.4. The network shall migrate from existing frequency bands and
waveforms to a standard interface configuration.

                    6.1.2.4.1. As a goal, ground-to-space and forward space-to-space
communications shall use the 2025-2110 Megahertz (MHz) frequency band as
specified in the National Table of Frequency Allocations. Dual operations in the
1761-1842 MHz and 2025-2110 frequency bands may be considered during a
transition period to facilitate satellite operations flexibility and interoperability.

                  6.1.2.4.2. Space-to-ground and space-to-space return
communications shall continue to use the 2200-2290 MHz frequency band as specified
in the National Table of Frequency Allocations.

                   6.1.2.4.3. The network shall be spectrum-efficient and tolerant of
unintentional radio frequency nterference.

                   6.1.2.4.4. The network shall provide a tracking capability utilizing
ranging codes on the network communications link for use during anomaly resolution
operations only as long as absolutely necessary. The network shall pursue and
implement technologies to eliminate ground-based radiometric tracking as soon as
feasible.

         6.1.3. Satellite and mission data operations shall reduce non-recurring
development, where practicable, through developing or adopting protocols and
standards and using open architecture configurations.

          6.1.4. Satellite operations shall use robust space- and ground-based
autonomy capabilities, where practicable, to reduce personnel and support
infrastructure costs.

          6.1.5. Mission needs and analysis of cost as an independent variable (CAIV)
shall determine operational connectivity path(s) from satellites to mission data



                                               8
                                                                              DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000


processing and satellite operations locations. The CAIV analysis shall address, at a
minimum, the following:

                 6.1.5.1. Direct connectivity between a spacecraft and a ground entry
point;

                 6.1.5.2. Crosslink between like satellites in a constellation;

                 6.1.5.3. Use of a U.S. Government relay satellite system; and

                 6.1.5.4. Commercially available space-based and terrestrial capabilities.

          6.1.6. DoD satellites shall reduce their demand for satellite operations
infrastructure by avoiding use of the technique of ranging codes on the satellite control
network communications link to determine satellite location and orbits.

                 6.1.6.1. Alternatives to this technique shall be identified, demonstrated,
and qualified.

              6.1.6.2. Satellites may use this technique when no practical alternative
exists to meet mission performance requirements.

    6.2. Space Transportation

          6.2.1. Expendable Launch Vehicles. The expendable launch vehicle fleet
shall be improved and evolved, including appropriate technology development, in
accordance with reference (b). The objective of this effort is to reduce costs while
providing assured access to space, improving reliability, operability, responsiveness,
and safety.

             6.2.1.1. Launch of multiple compatible payloads shall be actively
pursued to enhance launch responsiveness and flexibility.

             6.2.1.2. Combined expendable launch service procurements with the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) will be encouraged when
such procurements would result in cost savings or be otherwise advantageous to the
U.S. Government.

        6.2.2. Use of FSU-Produced Propulsion in Space Launch Vehicles.
FSU-produced propulsion systems, components, or technology, made entirely overseas
may be used in launch vehicles for national security missions. The use of such


                                                  9
                                                                            DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000


FSU-produced systems, components, or technology in U.S. launch vehicles used by the
Department of Defense for national security missions shall be carried out so that access
to space cannot be denied by the foreign supplier. A condition shall not be permitted
to exist or develop, which could result in national security space launches being
jeopardized by delays or disruptions in receipt of FSU-produced propulsion systems,
components, or technology.

              6.2.2.1. FSU-produced propulsion systems, components, or technology
used in launch vehicles for national security missions must be converted to U.S.
production within four years after contract award for Engineering and Manufacturing
Development.

                   6.2.2.1.1. Conversion of FSU-produced propulsion systems,
components, or technology to U.S. production may be accomplished using licensing,
co-production, or other industry-to-industry arrangements, as appropriate, while
maximum care is taken to prevent the unintended transfer of U.S. technology to foreign
entities or governments. Such arrangements shall ensure that U.S. manufacturers are
authorized to produce the propulsion system, component, or technology after the
transition to domestic sources. If such conversion is determined to be impractical
within four years, then the USD(AT&L) may grant a limited extension provided that
continued foreign production will not result in launch program vulnerability because of
delays or disruptions in the availability of the propulsion system, component, or
technology. Alternatives that minimize dependence on FSU-produced engines for
national security missions in lieu of establishing a U.S. production facility requires
USD(AT&L) approval.

              6.2.2.2. Launch vehicles used by the Department of Defense for national
security missions that incorporate FSU-proposed propulsion systems, components, or
technology shall meet all flight safety, flight qualifications, and other applicable
technical or performance demands.

              6.2.2.3. Sufficient quantity and quality of stocks (i.e., flight articles and
spares) to preclude a launch stand-down during a transition to U.S. sources shall be
ensured. Domestic ability to engineer and incorporate changes to the stocks shall be
ensured. Approved U.S. launch vehicle manufacturers' contingency plans shall be
required for alternative sources of FSU-produced propulsion systems, components, and
technology intended for use in DoD launch vehicle acquisition programs or
DoD-purchased launch services.

              6.2.2.4. Adequate technical information shall be provided to U.S. launch


                                               10
                                                                          DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000


vehicle manufacturers to resolve anomalies in a timely manner without adversely
affecting overall launch system reliability. At a minimum, this shall include detailed
information on the history, traceability, design, fabrication, manufacture, performance,
qualification and certification testing, and acceptable operating environments for each
FSU-produced system, component, or technology used on launch vehicles or launch
services purchased by the Department of Defense.

              6.2.2.5. Government-to-government agreements may be used as
necessary to facilitate the availability of FSU-produced propulsion systems,
components, or technology for DoD launch vehicles. U.S. launch vehicle
manufacturers shall be held responsible for ensuring the availability of such foreign
supplies.

          6.2.3. Reusable Launch Vehicles(RLVs). Military-unique requirements
shall be provided to NASA for incorporation into vehicle demonstration efforts, in
accordance with reference (b). Critical technologies required to meet military
requirements shall be developed in cooperation with NASA and U.S. industry,
consistent with reference (m).

         6.2.4. National Security Use of Space Transportation System. The Space
Shuttle may be used to meet national security needs, in cooperation with NASA, in
accordance with reference (b). Requests for such support shall be submitted through
the ASD(C3I)/CIO to the Secretary of Defense (SecDef) for approval. Launches
necessary to preserve and protect human life in space shall have the highest priority
except in times of national emergency, in accordance with reference (b).

          6.2.5. Exemptions for Launch of DoD Payloads on Foreign Launch Vehicles.
 Requests for exemptions to launch DoD payloads on non-U.S. manufactured launch
vehicles shall be submitted through the ASD(C3I)/CIO to the SecDef for review and
approval prior to submission to the President or his designated representative. Such
requests shall address, at a minimum, alternative launch capabilities for performing the
mission, the impact on military and intelligence activities, and overall risks and
benefits to U.S. national security interests.

         6.2.6. Excess Missile Assets. U.S. excess ballistic missile assets that will be
eliminated under strategic arms control agreements shall either be retained for
Government use or be destroyed in accordance with reference (b) and consistent with
reference (n). Such assets may be used by the U.S. Government for any purpose,
other than to launch payloads into orbit, upon approval by the Secretary of the Military
Department. Requests from within the Department of Defense or from other U.S.


                                              11
                                                                           DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000


Government Agencies to use excess assets for launching payloads into orbit shall be
considered on a case-by-case basis and require SecDef approval. Such use shall be
consistent with reference (l). Such requests shall be forwarded through the
ASD(C3I)/CIO to the SecDef for approval.

         6.2.7. Mission Assurance, Risk Management, and Safety. Clear
responsibility, accountability, and authority within the Department of Defense shall be
assigned for delivery of spacecraft to orbit.

             6.2.7.1. Lessons learned from space transportation missions shall be
disseminated across launch programs and U.S. contractors.

                6.2.7.2. Robust mission assurance support shall be maintained,
commensurate with risk, for the duration of launch vehicle fly-out programs as well as
for the transition to new launch vehicle programs.

             6.2.7.3. Mission performance incentives shall be designed to realistically
balance schedule and cost pressures, consistent with the value of payloads to be
launched.

         6.2.8. Launch Base and Range Modernization. Next-generation space
launch base and range technology development and demonstration activities shall be
focused on improved safety, increased flexibility and capacity, and lower costs. The
use of non-Federal sources of investment shall be encouraged for the continued
modernization and maintenance of launch bases and ranges to the extent allowed by
law.

     6.3. Space Debris. The creation of space debris shall be minimized, in
accordance with references (a) and (c) and consistent with reference (o). The
following debris mitigation practices must be considered, consistent with cost
effectiveness and mission requirements, in the acquisition and operation of space
systems:

         6.3.1. Release of debris during normal operations shall be controlled in all
operational orbit regimes. Spacecraft and upper stages shall be designed to eliminate
or minimize debris released during normal operations. Each instance of planned
release of debris larger than five millimeters in any dimension that remains on orbit for
more than 25 years shall be evaluated and justified on the basis of cost effectiveness
and mission requirements.



                                              12
                                                                            DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000




        6.3.2. Generation of debris by accidental explosions during and after
completion of mission operations shall be minimized.

               6.3.2.1. The development of the design of spacecraft or upper stages
shall seek to demonstrate that there is no credible failure mode for accidental
explosion. If credible failure modes exist, the probability of the occurrence of such
failure modes shall be limited through design or operational procedures.

               6.3.2.2. All on-board sources of stored energy of a spacecraft or upper
stage shall be depleted or safed when they are no longer required for mission
operations or post-mission disposal. Depletion shall occur as soon as such an
operation does not pose an unacceptable risk to the payload. Propellant depletion
burns and compressed gas releases shall be designed to minimize the probability of
subsequent accidental collision and to minimize the impact of a subsequent accidental
explosion.

           6.3.3. The probability of collision with known objects during launch and
orbital lifetime shall be estimated and limited in the development of the design and
mission profile for spacecraft or upper stages. Designs shall consider and, consistent
with cost effectiveness, limit the probability that collisions with debris smaller than one
centimeter in diameter will cause loss of control and prevent post-mission disposal.
Tether systems shall be uniquely analyzed for both intact and severed conditions.

     6.4. Spacecraft End-of-Life. Spacecraft disposal at the end of mission life shall
be planned for programs involving on-orbit operations, in accordance with reference
(c). A spacecraft or upper stage may be disposed of by one of the following methods:

          6.4.1. Atmospheric reentry. Leave the structure in an orbit in which, using
conservative projections for solar activity, atmospheric drag will limit the lifetime to no
longer than 25 years after completion of mission. If this option is selected, either the
risk of injury from the total debris casualty area for components and structural
fragments surviving reentry shall not exceed 1 in 10,000 (based upon an evenly
distributed human population density across the Earth), or it shall be confined to a
broad ocean or essentially unpopulated area.

          6.4.2. Maneuvering to a Storage Orbit. A maneuver strategy shall be used
that reduces the risk of leaving a structure near an operational orbit regime. The
structure may be relocated to one of the following storage regimes:



                                               13
                                                                           DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000




              6.4.2.1. An orbit with perigee altitude above 2,000 kilometers and
apogee altitude below 19,700 kilometers.

              6.4.2.2. An orbit with perigee altitude above 20,700 kilometers and
apogee altitude below 35,300 kilometers.

              6.4.2.3. An orbit with perigee altitude above 36,100 kilometers.

              6.4.2.4. Removal from Earth orbit into heliocentric orbit.

         6.4.3. Direct retrieval. Retrieve the structure and remove it from orbit as
soon as practical after mission completion.

    6.5. Nuclear Power Sources in Earth Orbit. Requests to use nuclear power
sources in Earth orbit shall include an environmental impact analysis or nuclear safety
evaluation, as appropriate, in accordance with references (c) and (k).

          6.5.1. The Heads of the DoD Components may make requests to the SecDef
to use nuclear power sources in Earth orbit through the USD(AT&L). The
USD(AT&L) shall coordinate such requests with the ASD(C3I)/CIO, the USD(P), and
the GC, DoD. The USD(AT&L) shall forward such requests and their environmental
impact analysis and nuclear safety evaluation to the SecDef for approval. Such
requests shall address, at a minimum, alternative satellite power sources capable of
performing the mission, the impact on military and intelligence activities, and overall
risks and benefits to U.S. national security interests.

         6.5.2. The DoD Executive Secretary shall forward determinations to use
nuclear reactors in Earth orbit, upon approval by SecDef or Deputy Secretary of
Defense, to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and the
Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, in accordance with reference
(k).




                                              14
                                                  DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 1
   E1. References, continued




                                             15
                                                                         DODI 3100.12, Sep. 14, 2000



                                 E1. ENCLOSURE 1
                              REFERENCES, continued


(e) Assistant Secretary of Defense (C3I) Memorandum, "Satellite Operations
     Architecture Study," February 7, 2000 (hereby superseded)
(f) DoD Directive 3200.11, "Major Range and Test Facility Base," January 26, 1998
(g) Public Law 105-303, Commercial Space Act of 1998
(h) DoD Directive 3230.3, "DoD Support for Commercial Space Launch Activities,"
     October 14, 1986
(i) "Memorandum of Agreement between the Department of Defense and the National
     Aeronautics and Space Administration on Space Launch Coordination Involving
     the 2200-2290 MHz Band," May 4, 2000
(j) "Memorandum of Agreement among the Department of Defense, Federal Aviation
     Administration, and National Aeronautics and Space Administration on Federal
     Interaction with Launch Site Operators," September 11, 1997
(k) Presidential Directive NSC-25, "Scientific or Technological Experiments with
     Possible Large-Scale Adverse Environmental Effects and Launch of Nuclear
     Systems into Space," December 14, 1977 (as amended May 17, 1995)
(l) DoD Directive 2060.1, "Implementation of, and Compliance with, Arms Control
     Agreements," July 31, 1992
(m) Joint Report of the Department of Defense, Department of Commerce,
     Department of Transportation, and National Aeronautics and Space
     Administration, "National Space Transportation Policy Coordinated Technology
     Plan," November 11, 1994
(n) Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs/Assistant to the President
     for Science and Technology Memorandum, "Excess Strategic Ballistic Missiles,"
     October 7, 1994
(o) "Joint DoD/NASA Guidelines on Orbital Debris Mitigation Standard Practices,"
     December 1997




                                             16
