                              Department of Defense

                               DIRECTIVE
                                                                        NUMBER 5210.55
                                                                        December 15, 1998



                                                                                   (ES, OSD)

SUBJECT: Department of Defense Presidential Support Program

References: (a) DoD Directive 5210.55, "Selection of DoD Military and Civilian
                Personnel and Contractor Employees for Assignment to Presidential
                Support Activities," July 6, 1977 (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Instruction 5210.87, "Selection of DoD Military and Civilian
                Personnel and Contractor Employees for Assignment to Presidential
                Support Activities," November 30, 1998
            (c) DoD Directive 1000.17, "Detail of DoD Personnel Assigned to Duty
                Outside the Department of Defense," July 28, 1988
            (d) through (f), see enclosure 1


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive:

     1.1. Reissues reference (a) to update policies and assign responsibilities.

     1.2. Is implemented by reference (b) prescribing the procedures for the nomination,
screening, selection, approval and continued evaluation of DoD military and civilian
personnel, and contractor employees assigned to, or retained in Presidential support
duties.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

This Directive:

     2.1. Applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Inspector General
of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies and the DoD Field Activities
                                                        DoDD 5210.55, December 15, 1998


(hereafter referred to collectively as "the DoD Components") having a Presidential
support mission.

     2.2. Encompasses all DoD organizations and, through incorporation of its terms into
contracts, contractors that assign personnel to Presidential support duties involving
regular or frequent access to the President or Vice President, or to facilities that support
the President or Vice President, including communications activities and modes of
transportation.

      2.3. Does not apply to DoD personnel or contractors whose duties involve
infrequent visits to the Executive offices of the White House or other Presidential support
facilities to conduct official business with the Presidential and/or Vice Presidential staffs.

     2.4. Does not apply to personnel providing Presidential protection support duties or
personnel assigned to other duties supporting the President on a temporary, intermittent,
or seasonal basis, not to exceed an aggregate of 180 days in either a single continuous
assignment or series of assignments.

     2.5. Does not establish reimbursement policies or procedures. The policies for
reimbursements and applicable amounts to be recouped are in DoD Directive 1000.17
(reference (c)).

     2.6. Does not apply to details made pursuant to 3 U.S.C. 112 (reference (d)) or DoD
Directive 1000.17 (reference (c)) to the Executive Office of the President or the agencies
of the Executive Office of the President.


3. DEFINITION

Presidential Support Facilities. The temporary or permanent areas designed, intended or
maintained for sole support of the President or Vice President.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:

     4.1. The President shall be provided with the optimum level of security and support.

      4.2. Persons assigned to, or retained in Presidential support duties, shall be the best
suited and best qualified for these duties, based on a determination that their assignment
or retention is clearly consistent with optimum Presidential security and support.

     4.3. All persons serving in Presidential support duties must be U.S. citizens.



                                              2
                                                       DoDD 5210.55, December 15, 1998


     4.4. Denial or revocation of a security clearance for access to classified information
shall automatically result in disqualification for Presidential support duties.

     4.5. Any DoD civilian or contractor employee not approved for, or removed from,
Presidential support duties shall be afforded an opportunity to appeal this decision, unless
the individual is disqualified as provided in paragraph 4.4., above. Military personnel are
not afforded the opportunity to appeal, unless the assignment policies of the Military
Departments concerned allow for such appeals in assignment actions.

     4.6. The investigative requirements and adjudicative standards for persons serving
in Presidential support duties shall be in accordance with reference (c) and DoD 5200.2-R
(reference (e)).

     4.7. All persons assigned to Presidential support duties will be volunteers for
assignment to, or work in support of, the Presidential support mission. However, when
volunteers are not available for enlisted support positions, qualified enlisted non-
volunteers may be nominated.

     4.8. The tour of duty for all military personnel selected for assignment to
Presidential support duties shall be stabilized for the maximum period allowable under
the assignment policies of the Military Department concerned, with a minimum of 2
years from the date of assignment to Presidential support duties. Waivers of obligated
service to meet this requirement will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the
Executive Secretary of the Department of Defense. This policy does not apply to Honor
Guard units, Social Aides or White House NCOs assigned to the Military Departments.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

     5.1. The Executive Secretary of the Department of Defense shall be the final
approval authority for assignment of individuals used in Presidential support duties and
for general oversight of the implementation of this Directive. Waiver of specific
requirements in this Directive may be granted only by the Executive Secretary.

     5.2. The Heads of the DoD Components with a Presidential support mission shall:

          5.2.1. Designate a single office to represent the DoD Component on all matters
covered by this Directive at the Service secretariat or comparable Defense Agency level.
Responsibilities of the DoD Components under this Directive may not be delegated
below this level.

           5.2.2. Ensure individuals are identified for assignment to Presidential support
duties, either as initial appointees or replacements, in a timely manner to permit
processing of the required investigations and higher level review before assignment.



                                             3
                                                      DoDD 5210.55, December 15, 1998


           5.2.3. Ensure that replacements are assigned for individuals who complete
their tours of duty in Presidential support positions unless the requirement is
discontinued.

          5.2.4. Ensure that the requirements of this Directive are incorporated into the
contract of each contractor involved in Presidential support duties.

          5.2.5. Establish procedures to evaluate the continued suitability of personnel
serving in Presidential support duties and management personnel exercising supervision
over contractor employees performing Presidential support duties in accordance with
reference (b).

          5.2.6. Report to the Executive Secretary on a periodic basis information about
personnel assigned to Presidential Support Duties in accordance with DoD Instruction
5210.87 (reference (b)).


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS

The reporting requirement identified in section 5., above and further described in DoD
Instruction 5210.87 (reference (b)) has been assigned Report Control Symbol DD-
5D(Q)934, in accordance with DoD 8910.1-M (reference (f)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 1
  E1. References, continued




                                             4
                                               DoDD 5210.55, December 15, 1998


                              E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                           REFERENCES, continued


(d) Title 3, United States Code
(e) DoD 5200.2-R, "DoD Personnel Security Program," January 1987
(f) DoD 8910.1-M, "DoD Procedures for Management of Information Requirements,"
    November 1986




                                       5                         ENCLOSURE 1
