                                  Department of Defense
                                    INSTRUCTION

                                                                           NUMBER 1341.06
                                                                              April 3, 2007

                                                                                   USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Veterans Employment Assistance Program (VEAP)

References: (a) DoD Directive 1341.6, “Veterans Employment Assistance Program,”
                March 28, 1985 (hereby canceled)
            (b) Acting Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DoD Directives Review
                – Phase II,” July 13, 2005
            (c) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” October 17, 2006
            (d) Sections 4211, 4212, and 4214 of title 38, United States Code
            (e) through (g), see Enclosure 1


1. ISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Instruction:

   1.1. Reissues Reference (a) as a DoD Instruction in accordance with the guidance in
Reference (b) and the authority in Reference (c).

    1.2. Continues to implement policy, and provides procedures and responsibilities concerning
employment, training, and counseling of qualified covered veterans as established in Reference
(d) and 5 Code of Federal Regulations Part 720 (Reference (e)).

   1.3. Provides criteria and requirements for DoD Components to establish a VEAP.

   1.4. Requires DoD Components to comply with the following VEAP objectives:

        1.4.1. Development of maximum employment and job advancement opportunities for
qualified covered veterans.

      1.4.2. Development of an affirmative action plan for the hiring, placement, and
advancement of qualified disabled veterans, as required by Reference (e).
                                                                     DoDI 1341.06, April 3, 2007

2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the Defense Field Activities, and
all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to
collectively as the "DoD Components").


3. DEFINITIONS

   3.1. Covered Veterans. A covered veteran means any of the following veterans:

       3.1.1. A disabled veteran.

      3.1.2. A veteran who served on active duty in the Armed Forces during a war or in a
campaign or expedition for which a campaign badge has been authorized.

        3.1.3. A veteran who, while serving on active duty in the Armed Forces, including for
training, participated in a United States military operation for which an Armed Forces service
medal was awarded pursuant to Executive Order 12985 (Reference (f)).

       3.1.4. A recently separated veteran. The term “recently separated veteran” means any
veteran who was discharged or released from active duty during the previous 3-year period. The
term “covered veterans” is more explicitly defined in Reference (d).

    3.2. Disabled Veteran. The term ''disabled veteran'' means an individual who has served on
active duty in the Armed Forces, has been separated under honorable conditions, and has
established the present existence of a service-connected disability or is receiving compensation,
disability retirement benefits, or pension because of a public statute administered by the
Department of Veterans Affairs or a Military Department according to sections 5 United States
Code (U.S.C.) 2108, 3504, and 3310 (Reference (g)).

    3.3. Qualified. The term “qualified,” with respect to an employment, means having the
ability to perform the essential functions of the position with or without reasonable
accommodation according to Reference (d).


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy to ensure that qualified covered veterans are provided every opportunity in
recruitment, employment, and advancement for civilian positions within the Department of
Defense.




                                                2
                                                                       DoDI 1341.06, April 3, 2007

5. RESPONSIBILITIES

   5.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), shall:

       5.1.1. Oversee the implementation of the procedures in section 6.

       5.1.2. Delegate at will, all or part of the authorities described in section 6.

   5.2. The Heads of All DoD Components with independent appointing authority for
themselves and their serviced organizations shall:

       5.2.1. Establish and support a VEAP as prescribed in section 6.

       5.2.2. Delegate at will, all or part of the authorities described in section 6.

        5.2.3. Certify to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) by December 1 of each
year that it has an up-to-date Disabled Veterans Affirmative Action Program (DVAAP) plan and
provide to OPM an Accomplishment Report as provided in Reference (e).

       5.2.4. Ensure the timely submission of its DVAAP plan and report directly to OPM upon
request as provided in Reference (e).


6. PROCEDURES

The DoD Components shall develop a VEAP that provides:

    6.1. Qualified covered veterans, under a special veteran appointing authority such as the
Veterans Recruitment Appointment, with maximum employment opportunities and consideration
for competitive service positions open to candidates outside the Component as appropriate.

    6.2. Qualified covered veterans with opportunities to obtain job skills through training and
that such veterans progress to the full level of job potential.

   6.3. The development of a DVAAP plan to promote employment and advancement
opportunities for qualified disabled veterans as prescribed by Reference (e). The DVAAP plan
must provide for a strategy that promotes continuing recruitment, hiring, placement, and
advancement of disabled veterans to include:

        6.3.1. A strategy for collaborative interaction with veterans organizations; the
Department of Labor and State and local employment agencies; private veterans assistance
centers; the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), including VA Hospitals; and organizations
fostering the employment of qualified disabled veterans to attract veterans for positions that must
only be filled by qualified veterans according to Reference (g).

     6.3.2. A strong policy statement issued by the Head of the DoD Component requiring
maximum consideration for placement opportunities and reasonable accommodations for

                                                  3
                                                                    DoDI 1341.06, April 3, 2007

qualified eligible veterans, especially those who are 30% or more disabled, who are actively
seeking employment or currently employed within the Component.

        6.3.3. Provisions permitting veterans eligible under any special veteran appointing
authority to receive concurrent consideration with other applicants for competitive service
positions open to applicants outside the Component as deemed appropriate.

       6.3.4. Provisions permitting use of a waiver for preference eligible individuals where
physical requirements (age, height, weight) are qualifying elements for a position and reasonable
accommodations can be made for successful performance according to Reference (g).

       6.3.5. Assignment of overall program responsibility within the Component, for the
development and implementation of the DVAAP plan at a level appropriate to ensure effective
program administration according to Reference (e).

       6.3.6. Annual assessment of accomplishments and shortfalls within the plan in
comparison to the previous year’s program results and other relevant veteran employment data,
with emphasis on those veterans who are 30 percent or more disabled according to Reference (e).


7. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS

    7.1. DoD Components will conduct a problem analysis to identify and overcome
deficiencies in the employment and advancement of disabled veterans within the Component and
meet annual OPM reporting requirements in accordance with Reference (e).

   7.2. The report contained in this Instruction has been assigned interagency Report Control
Symbol 0305-OPM-AN in accordance with Reference (e).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 1
   E1. References, continued


                                                4
                                                                  DoDI 1341.06, April 3, 2007

                                     E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                  REFERENCES, continued


(e) Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart C, Part 720, "Disabled Veterans Affirmative
    Action Program,” as amended
(f) Executive Order 12985, “Establishing the Armed Forces Service Medal,” January 11, 1996
(g) Sections 2108, 3504, and 3310 of title 5, United States Code




                                              5                               ENCLOSURE 1
