                             Department of Defense
                               INSTRUCTION

                                                                           NUMBER 4140.58
                                                                              January 8, 2010
                                                          Incorporating Change 1, June 28, 2022

                                                                                     USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     National Guard and Reserve Equipment Report

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 4140.58 (Reference (a)) as an Instruction in accordance
with the authority in DoDD 5124.02 (Reference (b)) to update policy and responsibilities for
preparing and submitting the National Guard and Reserve Equipment Report to the Congress on
Reserve Component (RC) equipment in accordance with Section 10541 of Title 10, United States
Code (Reference (c)).

   b. Reiterates policy and assigns responsibilities associated with equipping the RCs.

   c. Incorporates new reporting requirements directed in Public Law 110-181 (Reference (d)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector General of the Department of
Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, the National Guard Bureau, and all
other organizational entities within the Department of Defense.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The Congress must be provided an annual written report by February 15 on the equipment
of the RC for each of the 3 succeeding fiscal years (FYs), in accordance with Reference (c).
                                                              DoDI 4140.58, January 8, 2010

  b. Procuring and distributing equipment for the RC is to be accomplished in accordance with
DoD Instruction 1225.06 (Reference (e)).

   c. Responsibility for oversight of the RC will be in accordance with DoDD 5125.01
(Reference (f)).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective January 8, 2010.


9. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance update organizational titles and
references for accuracy.




                                              Gail H. McGinn
                                              Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Plans)
                                              Performing the Duties of the
                                                 Under Secretary of Defense for
                                                 Personnel and Readiness

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   Glossary




Change 1, 06/28/2022                          2
                                                            DoDI 4140.58, January 8, 2010

                                     ENCLOSURE 1

                                     REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 4140.58, “National Guard and Reserve Equipment Report (NGRER),”
    October 21, 1993 (hereby canceled)
(b) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c) Section 10541 of Title 10, United States Code
(d) Public Law 110-181, “The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008,”
    January 28, 2008
(e) DoD Instruction 1225.06, “Equipping the Reserve Forces,” May 16, 2012, as amended
(f) DoDD 5124.10 “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
    (ASD(M&RA),” March 14, 2018
(g) DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation (FMRs),”
    Volume 2A, as amended




Change 1, 06/28/2022                        3                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDI 4140.58, January 8, 2010

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
(ASD(M&RA)). The ASD(M&RA), under the authority, direction, and control of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness:

    a. Forwards a memorandum annually (approximately July 1) to the Military Departments
and the National Guard Bureau that provides detailed instructions on preparing the current year’s
National Guard and Reserve Equipment Report, including data requirements, formats, and
narrative requirements.

   b. Provides to the Military Departments an annual Milestone Schedule, which specifies the
timetable for submission of the required inputs.

    c. Obtains OSD and Military Departments’ coordination and arrange for printing and
distribution of the National Guard and Reserve Equipment Report.


2. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND THE COMMANDANT OF
THE COAST GUARD. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Commandant of
the Coast Guard:

   a. Provide the information requested by the ASD(M&RA) to produce the National Guard
and Reserve Equipment Report.

    b. Maintain the capability within Service data systems to provide RC programming,
requirements, and inventory data needed to support the National Guard and Reserve Equipment
Report, including the capability to assess the accuracy of RC equipment procurement projections
by tracking RC procurement funding from appropriation through acquisition to unit equipment
delivery.


3. CHIEF OF THE NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU (CNGB). The CNGB:

   a. Provides the information requested by the ASD(M&RA) to produce the National Guard
and Reserve Equipment Report.

   b. Provides a certification setting forth an inventory for the preceding FY of each item of
equipment for which funds were appropriated; which was due to be procured for the National
Guard in that FY; and which was not received by a National Guard unit by the end of that FY.




Change 1, 06/28/2022                            4                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 4140.58, January 8, 2010

                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


The annual report submitted to the Congress must, at a minimum, provide the following
information:

   a. The Military Departments’ plans to maximize RC equipment availability in accordance
with Reference (e).

   b. Recommendations as to the quantity and type of each major item of equipment (MIE) that
should be in the inventory of the RC.

   c. The quantity and average age of each type of MIE expected to be physically in the
inventory of the RC at the beginning of each FY covered by the report.

   d. The quantity and cost of each type of MIE expected to be procured for the RC from
commercial sources or to be transferred to the RC from the Active Components (ACs).

   e. The quantity of each type of MIE expected to be retired, decommissioned, transferred, or
otherwise removed from the physical inventory of the RC, and replacement plans for that
equipment.

   f. The full wartime requirement of each type of MIE required by the RC and the quantity of
each such item in the RC inventory at the end of the third succeeding FY.

   g. The quantity of Service-authorized substitutes for each type of MIE in the inventory of the
RC, and an indication whether the substitute is deployable in time of war.

   h. A narrative explanation of the plan of each Military Department to provide equipment
needed to fill the RC wartime requirement of each MIE, including an explanation of the plan to
equip RC units that are short of major items at the outset of war.

   i. For each MIE listed as a planned RC procurement or AC to RC transfer in the National
Guard and Reserve Equipment Report submitted to Congress 3 years prior to the current
National Guard and Reserve Equipment Report (e.g., for the FY 2010 National Guard and
Reserve Equipment Report, the MIEs listed in the FY 2007 National Guard and Reserve
Equipment Report), the quantity actually procured or transferred.

   j. A statement of the current status of the compatibility and interoperability of equipment
between the RC and AC, the effect of that level of incompatibility or lack of interoperability on
combat effectiveness, and a plan to achieve full equipment compatibility or interoperability.

   k. An assessment of the extent to which the National Guard possesses the equipment
required to perform the responsibilities of the National Guard in response to an emergency or



Change 1, 06/28/2022                            5                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 4140.58, January 8, 2010

major disaster. Assessment shall identify any equipment shortfalls likely to affect the ability of
the National Guard to perform these responsibilities, evaluate the effect of any such shortfall, and
identify the requirements and investment strategies for equipment to reduce or eliminate the
shortfall.

    l. The report shall use the same format and provide the same level of detail as the
information presented in the annual Future Years Defense Program Procurement Annex in
accordance with DoD 7000.14-R (Reference (g)).

    m. For the Army and Air National Guard MIEs listed in the National Guard and Reserve
Equipment Report submitted to Congress 3 years prior to the current National Guard and
Reserve Equipment Report (e.g., for the FY 2010 National Guard and Reserve Equipment
Report, the MIEs listed in the FY 2007 National Guard and Reserve Equipment Report), a
statement of the accuracy of the inventory projections for the third succeeding FY, and an
explanation if the projection was not met.

    n. A certification from the CNGB setting forth an inventory for the preceding FY of each
item of equipment for which funds were appropriated; which was due to be procured for the
National Guard in that FY; and which was not received by a National Guard unit by the end of
that FY.




Change 1, 06/28/2022                             6                              ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 4140.58, January 8, 2010



                                           GLOSSARY

                                          DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

AC. The Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, and the Coast Guard without their
RC.

compatibility. Capability of two or more items or components of equipment or materiel to exist
or function in the same system or environment without mutual interference.

interoperability. The ability to operate in synergy in the execution of assigned tasks.

MIE. Aircraft, tanks, ships, trucks, engineer equipment, and major items of support equipment.
Major items of equipment should include major weapon systems, items with large dollar-value
requirements or shortages, RC procurement program items and National Guard and Reserve
Equipment Appropriations procurement items, as well as any RC-specific item highlighted in the
narrative.

on-hand. Total quantity of an item of equipment currently in the inventory of a specific unit or
component.

RCs. The Army National Guard of the United States, the Army Reserve, the Naval Reserve, the
Marine Corps Reserve, the Air National Guard of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, and
the Coast Guard Reserve.

requirement. Capability or total quantity of an item of equipment required to be on-hand or
available to meet wartime requirements at the outset of war.

substitute for a major item. An item or capability that is authorized by the Service to be used as
a substitute for a required MIE when sufficient quantities of the required MIE are not available.




Change 1, 06/28/2022                             7                                  GLOSSARY
