                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION
                                                                              NUMBER 4515.14
                                                                                    June 28, 2013
                                                            Incorporating Change 2, April 14, 2022

                                                                                             DA&M

SUBJECT:      Washington Local Commuting Area

References: See Enclosure


1. PURPOSE. This instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 4515.14 (Reference (a)) as a DoD instruction in
accordance with the authority in References (b), (e), (f), and (g) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities for the Washington Local Commuting Area for personnel conducting official
business from permanent or temporary duty stations located in the National Capital Region
(NCR). The policy is in accordance with paragraph 010206.D.2G in Chapter 1 of Volume 1,
Joint Travel Regulations (Reference (c)).

   b. Clarifies when transportation expenses may be authorized or approved for local travel
without the issuance of a travel order.


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Office of Inspector General of
the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, and the DoD Field Activities in the NCR that
are serviced by Washington Headquarters Services (WHS) (referred to collectively in this
instruction as the “WHS-serviced Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy in accordance with Reference (c) that:

  a. A local official, as defined in Reference (c) will define the “Washington Local
Commuting Area” in which the commuting public travels during normal business hours.

    b. This instruction defines the “Washington Local Commuting Area” for personnel
conducting official business from permanent or temporary duty stations located in the NCR,
unless some other “local commuting area” has been defined in accordance with
Chapter 1 of Volume 1, Joint Travel Regulations (Reference (c)).
                                                                   DoDI 4515.14, June 28, 2013


    c. Official travel in the “Washington Local Commuting Area” need not be authorized by
issuance of travel orders.

    d. This instruction does not preclude the issuance of travel orders, the reimbursement of
travel expenses, and the payment of per diem in applicable circumstances, when permitted by
Reference (c).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. The WHS-serviced Component heads will determine whether:

   a. Component employees and Military Service members may be reimbursed for local travel
when conducting official business from a permanent or temporary duty station in the NCR.

   b. Travel orders must be issued for local travel when conducting official business from a
permanent or temporary duty station in the NCR.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change is administrative and, in accordance with the
February 1, 2022 Washington Headquarters Services Memorandum (Reference (e)):

    a. Reassigns the Director of Administration, Office of the Deputy Chief Management
Officer of the Department of Defense responsibilities and duties to the Director of
Administration and Management (DA&M) in accordance with section 901 of Public Law 116-
283 (Reference (f)), which eliminated the position of the Deputy Chief Management Officer of
the Department of Defense effective January 1, 2021, and the January 11, 2021 Deputy Secretary
of Defense Memorandum (Reference (g)), which implemented Reference (f) and reestablished
the DA&M.

   b. Updates organizational titles and references for accuracy.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective June 28, 2013.




                                                Michael L. Rhodes
                                                Director of Administration and Management

Enclosure
   References
Glossary



Change 2, 04/14/2022                           2
                                                               DoDI 4515.14, June 28, 2013


                                      ENCLOSURE

                                      REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 4515.14, “Washington Local Commuting Area,” December 28, 1998, as
    amended (hereby cancelled)
(b) DoD Directive 5105.53, “Director of Administration and Management (DA&M),” February
    26, 2008
(c) Joint Travel Regulations, Volume 1, “Uniformed Service Members and DoD Civilian
    Employees,” current edition
(d) Section 2674 of Title 10, United States Code
(e) Washington Headquarters Services Memorandum, “Approval of Administrative Changes to
    ODA&M DoD Issuances,” February 1, 2022
(f) Public Law 116-283, “William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act
    for Fiscal Year 2021,” January 1, 2021
(g) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Disestablishment of the Chief Management
    Officer of the DoD and Realignment of Functions and Responsibilities,” January 11, 2021




Change 2, 04/14/2022                        3                                ENCLOSURE
                                                                        DoDI 4515.14, June 28, 2013


                                             GLOSSARY

                         PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


 DoDD DoD directive


 NCR       National Capital Region


 WHS       Washington Headquarters Services


                                      PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.

NCR. For the purpose of this instruction and in accordance with section 2674 of Title 10, United
States Code (Reference (d)), the NCR is defined as the geographic area located in the following
boundaries:

    District of Columbia.

    Montgomery and Prince George’s Counties in the State of Maryland and all cities now and
hereafter existing in the geographic area bounded by the outer boundaries of the combined areas
of the countries listed above.

   Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, and Prince William Counties in the Commonwealth of
Virginia, and all cities now and hereafter existing in the geographic area bounded by the outer
boundaries of the combined areas of the counties listed above and other units of government
within the geographic areas of such district, counties, and city.

permanent duty station. The designated post of duty or official station, the limits of which are
the corporate limits of the city or town in which the employee is stationed. If not stationed in an
incorporated city or town, the official station is the reservation, station, or established area, or, in
the case of large reservations, the established subdivisions thereof having definite boundaries
within which the designated post of duty is located. This is not to be confused with the term
“Washington Local Commuting Area” as defined in this instruction.

Washington Local Commuting Area. The geographic areas surrounding the NCR from which
DoD personnel may commute to permanent or temporary duty stations. These areas include (but
are not limited to):

    In the District of Columbia: The entire area within the boundaries of Washington, DC.




Change 2, 04/14/2022                               4                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                     DoDI 4515.14, June 28, 2013


    In Maryland: The counties of Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Carroll, Charles, Frederick,
Harford, Howard, Montgomery, Prince George’s, St. Mary’s, and Washington. It also includes
the city of Baltimore and all cities now and hereafter existing in the geographic area bounded by
the outer boundaries of the combined areas of the counties listed above.

     In Virginia: The counties of Albemarle, Arlington, Clarke, Culpeper, Fairfax, Fauquier,
Greene, King George, Loudoun, Madison, Orange, Prince William, Spotsylvania, and Stafford.
It also includes the cities of Alexandria, Fairfax, Falls Church, Fredericksburg, and all cities now
and hereafter existing in the geographic area bounded by the outer boundaries of the combined
areas of these listed Virginia counties.

   In Pennsylvania: The county of Adams.

   In West Virginia: The counties of Morgan, Berkeley, and Jefferson.




Change 2, 04/14/2022                             5                                   GLOSSARY
