                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION
                                                                              NUMBER 4715.05
                                                                               November 1, 2013
                                                          Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018

                                                                                     USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:     Environmental Compliance at Installations Outside the United States

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5134.01 and DoDD
4715.1E (References (a) and (b)), this instruction reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 4715.5
(Reference (c)) to update established policy and assigned responsibilities for managing
environmental compliance to protect human health and safety outside the United States on
installations under DoD control.


2. APPLICABILITY

   a. This instruction:

       (1) Applies to:

           (a) OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General
of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD
Components”).

          (b) Actions of the DoD Components outside the United States on installations under
DoD control.

          (c) Support functions for U.S. military vessels, ships, aircraft, or space vehicles
provided by the DoD Components, including management and disposal of off-loaded waste or
hazardous materials.

       (2) Does not apply to:

           (a) U.S. military vessels, ships, aircraft, or space vehicles.
                                                                  DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013



           (b) Off-installation training.

           (c) Contingency locations and associated operations and deployments, including
cases of hostilities, contingency operations in hazardous areas, peacekeeping missions, or relief
operations. These include U.S. forces operating as part of a multinational force not under full
U.S. control.

           (d) Facilities and activities associated with the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, in
accordance with Executive Order (E.O.) 12344 (Reference (d)) and conducted pursuant to
section 7158 of Title 42, United States Code (Reference (e)).

            (e) Actions to remediate environmental contamination. DoDI 4715.08 (Reference
(f)) generally covers remediation.

           (f) Environmental analyses conducted in accordance with E.O. 12114 (Reference
(g)).

             (g) DoD installations that do not have the potential to affect the natural environment
(e.g., activities that are primarily administrative) or where, in consultation with the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations, and Environment (ASD(EI&E)), the applicable
Combatant Commander has determined that no significant force health protection or
environmental threats exist.

           (h) Activities, systems, operations and areas on DoD installations for which DoD has
no authority or responsibility.

    b. Nothing in this instruction creates any right or benefit, substantive or procedural,
enforceable at law or in equity, by any person or entity against the United States, its agencies, its
officers, or any person.

   c. Under no circumstances is this instruction intended to require noncompliance with
applicable international law or agreements with foreign nations.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. DoD manages and applies installation assets to sustain the DoD national defense mission;
uses environmental, safety, and occupational health management systems in mission planning
and execution across all military operations and activities; and ensures all organizations plan,
program, and budget to manage the environmental, safety, and occupational health risks that
their activities generate in accordance with Reference (b).

    b. DoD establishes, maintains, and complies with final governing standards (FGSs) to
protect human health and the environment for those foreign countries identified by the Under
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)). The FGSs will



Change 2, 08/31/2018                              2
                                                               DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

reconcile the requirements of applicable international agreements and applicable host-nation
environmental standards in accordance with E.O. 12088 (Reference (h)) and DoD 4715.05-G,
also known and referred to in this instruction as the “Overseas Environmental Baseline Guidance
Document (OEBGD)” (Reference (i)).

    c. Waste that is considered to be hazardous under country-specific FGS or the OEBGD,
whichever applies, and is generated by DoD on installations outside the United States, will not
be disposed of in the host nation without an agreement as described in section 5 of Enclosure 3.

   d. A program for regular assessment of environmental compliance at installations outside the
United States is established and conducted by DoD Components.

    e. DoD Components conduct environmental compliance activities at off-installation
locations in accordance with applicable international agreements, other DoDDs and DoDIs, and
environmental compliance requirements incorporated into environmental management annexes
and plans, as appropriate.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (j)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective November 1, 2013.



                                                    Frank Kendall
                                                    Under Secretary of Defense
                                                    for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   4. DoD TEC for Europe
Glossary



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            3
                                                                                            DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................5

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................6

     USD(AT&L) ..............................................................................................................................6
     ASD(EI&E)................................................................................................................................6
     DIRECTOR, DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY (DLA) .........................................................6
     DoD COMPONENT HEADS....................................................................................................7
     SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS........................................................8
     COMBATANT COMMANDERS.............................................................................................8
     COMMANDER, U.S. EUROPEAN COMMAND (USEUCOM) ............................................9

ENCLOSURE 3: PROCEDURES ................................................................................................10

     DESIGNATION OF A DoD LEC ......................................................................................….10
     DESIGNATION OF COUNTRIES REQUIRING AN FGS ...................................................10
     MAINTENANCE OF THE OEBGD.......................................................................................11
     DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF FGSs FOR INSTALLATIONS
        OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES ..................................................................................11
     ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES FOR HAZARDOUS WASTES ..........................................13
     PLANNING, PROGRAMMING, AND BUDGETING..........................................................14
     EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABLE STANDARDS ................................................................15
     DISPUTE RESOLUTION .......................................................................................................17
     POLLUTION PREVENTION GUIDANCE ...........................................................................17

     APPENDIX
       DESIGNATED DoD LECs AND COUNTRIES REQUIRING AN FGS ........................18

ENCLOSURE 4: DoD TEC FOR EUROPE ................................................................................19

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................20

     PART I: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................20
     PART II: DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................20

TABLE

     Designated DoD LECs and Countries Requiring an FGS .......................................................18




Change 2, 08/31/2018                                                  4                                                    CONTENTS
                                                              DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
      Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(b)   DoD Directive 4715.1E, “Environment, Safety, and Occupational Health (ESOH),”
      March 19, 2005
(c)   DoD Instruction 4715.5, “Management of Environmental Compliance at Overseas
      Installations,” April 22, 1996 (hereby cancelled)
(d)   Executive Order 12344, “Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program,” February 1, 1982
(e)   Section 7158 of Title 42, United States Code
(f)   DoD Instruction 4715.08, “Remediation of Environmental Contamination Outside the
      United States,” November 1, 2013
(g)   Executive Order 12114, “Environmental Effects Abroad of Major Federal Actions,”
      January 4, 1979
(h)   Executive Order 12088, “Federal Compliance with Pollution Control Standards,” October
      13, 1978, as amended
(i)   DoD 4715.05-G, “Overseas Environmental Baseline Guidance Document,” May 1, 2007
(j)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
      Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
      of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(k)   Section 165 of Title 10, United States Code
(l)   DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Directives Program,” September 26, 2012, as amended
(m)   DoD Instruction 4715.23, “Integrated Recycling and Solid Waste Management,” October
      24, 2016
(n)   DoD Directive 5530.3, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987, as amended




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           5                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(AT&L). In coordination with the CJCS and the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
(USD(P)), the USD(AT&L):

    a. Establishes DoD environmental policies pertaining to all activities on installations outside
the United States, and consults on these policies with the DoD Components, the Department of
State, and other federal agencies, as appropriate.

    b. Designates a DoD Lead Environmental Component (LEC) for specific countries and
geographic locations outside the United States in accordance with section 1 of Enclosure 3 of
this instruction.

   c. Designates countries requiring an FGS in accordance with section 2 of Enclosure 3.


2. ASD(EI&E). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), the
ASD(EI&E):

    a. Oversees implementation of this instruction and provides guidance, oversight, advocacy,
and representation for environmental management and compliance programs outside the United
States in accordance with Reference (b).

  b. In coordination with the Combatant Commanders, nominates a DoD LEC to the
USD(AT&L) in accordance with section 1 of Enclosure 3.

    c. In coordination with the Combatant Commanders and designated DoD LECs, nominates
to the USD(AT&L) countries requiring an FGS.

   d. Resolves disputes raised by environmental policy principals of the DoD Components in
accordance with section 8 of Enclosure 3.

   e. Monitors compliance with this instruction, including development and use of appropriate
measures of merit and periodic review of the environmental management and compliance
programs of the DoD Components.


3. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY (DLA). In addition to the responsibilities in
section 4 of this enclosure, and under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L)
through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Logistics and Materiel Readiness, the Director,
DLA:




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

    a. Participates, as required, in the multidisciplinary committee the ASD(EI&E) forms and
leads to review and update the OEBGD in accordance with section 3 of Enclosure 3.

    b. Participates in the process to determine whether DoD-generated hazardous waste may be
disposed of in a foreign nation in accordance with section 5 of Enclosure 3.


4. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

    a. Comply with this instruction and provide administration and support of forces assigned to
Combatant Commanders, including planning, budgeting, programming, and execution, pursuant
to section 165 of Title 10, United States Code (Reference (k)).

   b. Carry out the responsibilities of the DoD LEC for specific countries, as provided in the
appendix to Enclosure 3 or for those countries the USD(AT&L) designates in the future. These
LEC responsibilities include:

       (1) Plan, program, and budget for preparation and maintenance of the FGS.

        (2) Identify applicable host-nation environmental standards, monitor regulatory trends,
and maintain copies of applicable host-nation environmental documents, standards, and
regulations.

       (3) Consult with host-nation authorities on environmental issues, as appropriate, to
maintain effective cooperation on environmental matters.

       (4) Consult with the chief of the U.S. diplomatic mission in the host nation, the affected
Military Services through the chain of command, the geographic Combatant Commanders, and
the USD(P) on significant issues arising from DoD environmental policy in that country.

       (5) Prepare and maintain the FGS in countries that the USD(AT&L) designates,
including providing technical, legal, and programmatic support to the process.

        (6) Adjudicate requests for exceptions from the DoD Components in accordance with
section 7 of Enclosure 3.

       (7) Keep DoD Components informed of current environmental developments and trends.

       (8) Perform such other responsibilities as may be assigned in other DoD issuances or
guidance.

  c. Provide technical, legal, and programmatic support to the process for maintenance of the
OEBGD.

    d. Establish and implement an environmental compliance assessment program for
installations outside the United States that includes internal and external environmental



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

assessments. At all installations, conduct external compliance assessments at a minimum of
once every 3 years and internal assessments at a minimum annually, except in those years when
an external compliance assessment is conducted.

   e. Designate DoD Component commanders or other officials who are authorized to request
exceptions in accordance with section 7 of Enclosure 3 or to initiate dispute resolution in
accordance with section 8 of Enclosure 3.

   f. Promptly notify the ASD(EI&E) and all affected elements of command of environmental
events deemed significant.

   g. Consult, cooperate with, and provide timely notice to other DoD Components regarding
environmental items of common interest affecting installations outside the United States.

    h. Identify program needs, develop solutions to common problems, share technological
information and expertise, develop common techniques and procedures, and conduct activities to
fulfill the requirements of this instruction.


5. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In addition to the responsibilities
in section 4 of this enclosure, the Secretaries of the Military Departments share lead
responsibility for maintaining the OEBGD on a rotational basis as the ASD(EI&E) determines.


6. COMBATANT COMMANDERS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this
enclosure and through the CJCS, the Combatant Commanders:

   a. Provide general oversight and coordination of this instruction to the DoD LEC as
necessary, to carry out their missions.

    b. Adjudicate requests for exceptions when the Military Department requesting the
exception is also the DoD LEC in accordance with paragraph 7h of Enclosure 3. In cases where
the Combatant Commander is the DoD LEC and desires to request an exception, the request will
be elevated to ASD(EI&E) for adjudication.

    c. Resolve disputes between the DoD Components and the DoD LEC in accordance with
section 8 of Enclosure 3. In cases where the Combatant Commander is the DoD LEC, the
dispute will be elevated to ASD(EI&E) for resolution.

   d. When requested, nominate a DoD LEC through the CJCS to ASD(EI&E) in accordance
with section 1 of Enclosure 3.

    e. When requested, nominate countries requiring an FGS through the CJCS to ASD(EI&E)
in accordance with section 2 of Enclosure 3.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           8                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

7. COMMANDER, U.S. EUROPEAN COMMAND (USEUCOM). In addition to the
responsibilities in sections 4 and 6 of this enclosure, and due to the unique construct and
influence of the European Union (EU), the Commander, USEUCOM, is designated as the DoD
Theater Environmental Coordinator (TEC) for Europe. As such, the Commander provides
specific oversight to ensure consistent application of this instruction at installations in host-
nation countries within the EU and geographically located within the USEUCOM area of
responsibility. Additional DoD TEC guidance is provided in Enclosure 4 of this instruction.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             9                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                                        PROCEDURES


1. DESIGNATION OF A DoD LEC. In coordination with the Combatant Commanders, the
ASD(EI&E) nominates to the USD(AT&L) a DoD Component as the DoD LEC for
environmental matters in specific foreign countries. These specific foreign countries are those
where the ASD(EI&E) determines that the DoD presence justifies the need for a DoD LEC.

   a. The ASD(EI&E) maintains the list of designated DoD LECs that is reviewed annually.
(See appendix to this enclosure for the list of designated DoD LECs.)

    b. Secretaries of Military Departments, Combatant Commanders, or subunified commanders
may be designated as a DoD LEC. When a Military Department Secretary is designated as a
DoD LEC, the Secretary concerned may delegate responsibilities through the chain of command
to an appropriate general-level or flag-level commander.

    c. Each Combatant Commander with a geographic area of responsibility encompassing a
foreign country may recommend a change to, addition, substitution, or elimination of a DoD
LEC. Such recommendations are submitted through the CJCS to the ASD(EI&E) for
coordination with the Military Departments prior to submittal to USD(AT&L).

   d. The USD(AT&L) designates the DoD LECs.


2. DESIGNATION OF COUNTRIES REQUIRING AN FGS. The ASD(EI&E), in
coordination with the Combatant Commanders and designated DoD LECs, nominates to the
USD(AT&L) countries requiring an FGS.

   a. The ASD(EI&E) maintains a list of countries requiring an FGS. (See appendix to this
enclosure for the list of countries requiring an FGS.)

    b. Each Combatant Commander with a geographic area of responsibility encompassing a
foreign country may recommend a change (e.g., addition or elimination) of a country requiring
an FGS. Such recommendations are submitted through the CJCS to the ASD(EI&E) for
coordination with the Military Departments prior to submittal to the USD(AT&L).

   c. The USD(AT&L) designates those countries requiring an FGS.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           10                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

3. MAINTENANCE OF THE OEBGD

   a. The DoD establishes, maintains and, as described in section 4 of this enclosure, complies
with the OEBGD. The OEBGD is designed to:

       (1) Protect human health and the environment.

        (2) Consider generally accepted federal environmental standards applicable to DoD
installations, facilities, and actions in the United States.

       (3) Incorporate requirements of U.S. law that have extraterritorial application to the
DoD.

    b. The OEBGD is reviewed every 5 years, or as the ASD(EI&E) directs, to ensure that it is
current. The ASD(EI&E) issues interim or supplemental guidance after consultation with the
Military Departments and the Joint Staff.

    c. A Secretary of a Military Department, as determined by ASD(EI&E) in accordance with
section 5 of Enclosure 2 of this instruction, leads the OEBGD review process, chairing a
multidisciplinary committee. The committee will consist of, at a minimum, representatives of
the Office of the ASD(EI&E), the other Military Departments, the Joint Staff, and DLA.
Comments from the Military Departments, to include DoD LECs, are solicited during the review
process.

   d. The ASD(EI&E) may issue supplemental guidance for the review process.

    e. Revisions to the OEBGD proposed by the multidisciplinary committee are forwarded to
the ASD(EI&E) for coordination, final approval, and publication in accordance with DoDI
5025.01 (Reference (l)).


4. DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF FGSs FOR INSTALLATIONS OUTSIDE
THE UNITED STATES

    a. The DoD LEC for a foreign nation consults with other theater DoD Components during
the development, revision, and maintenance of an FGS.

    b. The DoD LEC identifies applicable host-nation environmental standards. To be identified
as applicable, a standard must meet four criteria:

        (1) A published host-nation law or an applicable international agreement for the
protection of human health and the environment within the host nation. A transnational standard
may be considered to the extent it is legally enforceable on the host nation even though not
incorporated into the host-nation’s domestic law.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           11                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

        (2) Adequately defined and generally in effect and enforced against host-nation
government and private-sector activities. Laws of local governmental units are not included
unless they implement national laws that delegate authority to, or recognize the authority of, the
local governmental unit to regulate.

        (3) Applicable to a function, such as construction, maintenance, or operation of an
installation, for which the United States has primary responsibility.

        (4) Substantive and not administrative or procedural in nature (e.g., permits and licenses)
unless required by applicable international agreements.

   c. The DoD LEC develops and issues the FGS.

        (1) The DoD LEC uses the OEBGD to establish the FGS unless the OEBGD is less
protective than an applicable host-nation environmental standard or a standard under an
applicable international agreement. In case of inconsistency, the DoD LEC normally uses the
more protective standard to establish the FGS unless a specific international agreement with the
host nation mandates a different standard applicable to installations.

       (2) The DoD LEC normally bases the comparison of standards on individual standards.
Where, in the judgment of the DoD LEC, a standard can’t be considered individually because of
the comprehensive nature of the regulatory regime in that environmental subject, the comparison
may be broader and may compare the overall regulatory regime in the OEBGD with the
corresponding applicable regulatory regime. The more protective regime is used to establish the
FGS.

        (3) Other than for remediation and environmental effects analysis, if the OEBGD doesn’t
address a particular environmental standard (e.g., criteria), but it is addressed by an applicable
host-nation environmental or other applicable standard, the DoD LEC considers the applicable
host-nation environmental standard or standard under an applicable international agreement in
establishing the FGS. Until revisions to the OEBGD establish a standard for that subject, the
host-nation or international agreement standard is normally used to establish the FGS.

        (4) The scope of the FGS for any nation is determined by the mission, facilities, and
potential environmental impacts of DoD installations in that nation. If no additional protection
of the environment would result from the inclusion of a specific OEBGD standard, the DoD LEC
may determine that those standards need not be included in the FGS. The DoD LEC must
document the decision not to include one or more OEBGD areas and conduct a review of the
decision upon the subsequent revalidation or revision of the FGS.

        (5) The DoD LEC documents the decision-making process, including the FGS
comparative analysis strategy, products of the comparative analysis, decisions and analyses
regarding how a particular FGS standard was derived, and any other material documents
surrounding the development of the FGS. These documents are retained until the FGS standard
is revised. These documents may be released to the DoD Components, but generally will not be
released to the host nation authorities. The DoD LEC consults with legal counsel before



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            12                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

releasing decision-making process documents, including the comparative analysis products, to
host nation officials.

    d. The DoD LEC issues the FGS after consultation with the appropriate in-country or theater
representatives of the other DoD Components operating in the country, coordination with the
applicable Combatant Commander, and notification to the U.S. diplomatic mission.

    e. The DoD Components on DoD installations in a foreign nation for which FGSs have been
established will comply with the FGS established for that country. In determining whether the
FGS applies to any particular installation, the DoD Components will consider whether
responsibility for construction, maintenance, and operation of the installation rests primarily with
the United States or the host nation.

   f. The DoD LEC, in coordination with the applicable Combatant Commander, revalidates
and updates the FGS on a periodic basis, but at least every 5 years. If the procedures of
paragraphs 4c(1) through 4c(5) of this section are followed, partial or interim updates to the
DoD’s individual FGS standards are authorized. All FGS updates are compiled and forwarded
upon completion to ASD(EI&E).

    g. The DoD Components on DoD installations in a foreign nation for which no FGSs have
been established will comply with applicable international agreements, applicable host-nation
environmental standards pursuant to section 1-801 of Reference (h), and the appropriate sections
of the OEBGD. In cases of conflicting requirements, the DoD Components will normally
comply with the standard that is more protective of human health and the environment. The
DoD Components will consult with the DoD LEC or, if no DoD LEC is designated, with the
applicable Combatant Commander on actions that involve a substantial commitment of funds or
could set a precedent.


5. ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES FOR HAZARDOUS WASTES. In addition to the FGS or
OEBGD (where no FGS has been issued), or any similar directive, the management and disposal
of hazardous wastes outside the United States associated with applicable military activities will
comply with these additional procedures for the disposal of hazardous wastes:

   a. In a foreign nation:

       (1) DoD Components will not dispose of any wastes that DoD actions generate and that
are considered hazardous under either U.S. law or applicable host-nation standards, unless the
disposal complies with either the FGS, or if there is no FGS, the OEBGD, and is in accordance
with any applicable international agreement.

       (2) Without an applicable international agreement that grants disposal authority, DoD
Components will obtain explicit or implicit concurrence from the appropriate authorities of the
nation where the disposal takes place.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            13                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

        (3) Nothing in this section will be construed to indicate that the United States has
continuing responsibility for hazardous waste after it has been disposed of in accordance with
this section.

        (4) To the maximum extent practicable considering operational requirements and sound
fiscal practices, DoD Components will dispose of the hazardous waste so as to not retain any
future liability for the waste. DoD Components will not contractually retain any indicia of
ownership of the waste.

    b. When the requirements of paragraph 5a of this section cannot be met, DoD Components
will dispose of hazardous waste in the United States or in another foreign nation where the
applicable conditions are met, unless other disposal arrangements are approved by the
ASD(EI&E).

    c. The determination of whether a DoD-generated hazardous waste may be disposed of in a
foreign nation is made by the DoD LEC in coordination with the applicable Combatant
Commander, the Director, DLA, the USD(P), the other relevant DoD Component heads, and the
chief of the U.S. diplomatic mission.

        (1) Where significant threat, force protection, or mission imperatives dictate procedures
other than those described in this enclosure, the determination to deviate from the procedures in
paragraphs 5a and 5b of this section are made by the applicable Combatant Commander with,
time permitting, the concurrence of the Director, DLA, and in consultation with other relevant
DoD Component heads and the appropriate Department of State representative.

        (2) The circumstances surrounding the decision to deviate from the procedures in
paragraphs 5a and 5b of this section are documented and made a permanent record of the United
States.

    d. In addition to compliance with the applicable standards described in paragraphs 4e and 4g
of this enclosure, the DoD Components must comply with provisions of the status-of-forces
agreement and other applicable international agreements on the shipping and storage of
hazardous wastes.


6. PLANNING, PROGRAMMING, AND BUDGETING. Planning, programming, and
budgeting of funds and other resources required for compliance with this instruction are
accomplished in accordance with DoD procedures generally applicable to environmental
compliance.

   a. For planning, programming, and budgeting, the DoD Components will:

        (1) Treat the applicable set of environmental compliance standards for the host nation
applied in accordance with paragraphs 4e or 4g of this enclosure as validated budgetary
requirements and the functional equivalents of generally accepted environmental standards for
similar installations, facilities, and activities in the United States.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            14                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013



            (a) The DoD Components will plan, program, and budget for requirements over the
length of the first program objective memorandum cycle following the establishment of the FGS
or, in the case of the OEBGD, application of the OEGBD to a particular host nation for the first
time.

            (b) If there is a foreseeable budgetary impact arising from a material modification of
an FGS or the OEBGD, the DoD Component will plan, program, and budget for the requirement
over the length of the first program objective memorandum cycle following the effective date of
the modification.

        (2) Give the highest priority for funding and execution in the current year or in the
immediately following fiscal year to FGS or OEBGD requirements whose noncompliance would
result in one or more of the following:

          (a) Any human health or safety conditions that pose an immediate threat as
determined by the appropriate military medical authority.

           (b) A direct threat to ongoing U.S. operations or U.S. access to an installation outside
the United States.

           (c) A U.S. default on a standard made directly applicable to U.S. activities in an
international agreement.

        (3) All other requirements not likely to result in the occurrence of a noncompliance as
described in paragraphs 6a(2)(a), (b), or (c) of this section should be addressed according to a
risk-based prioritization based on local circumstances and long-term objectives.

    b. This instruction does not require or authorize the DoD Components to expend funds or
use other resources to meet requirements that are the responsibility of the host nation, as
stipulated in applicable international agreements.


7. EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABLE STANDARDS

   a. A DoD Component may request an exception to a standard otherwise applicable in
accordance with paragraphs 4e and 4g of this enclosure only if:

       (1) Compliance with the standard at particular installations or facilities would:

           (a) Seriously impair its mission.

           (b) Adversely affect relations with the host nation; or

            (c) Require substantial expenditure of funds for physical improvements at an
installation for which public notification for return is made.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            15                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013



       (2) An installation is identified for closure or realignment, which would remove the
requirement.

   b. An exception may not be granted to a standard if failure to comply would constitute a
breach of applicable U.S. law with extraterritorial effect or breach of an applicable international
agreement.

   c. All exception requests and decisions are in written form. The requestor and the decision-
making authority will maintain complete records and provide a copy to the ASD(EI&E). These
documents are permanent records and considered sufficiently valuable to warrant the Federal
Government’s continued preservation.

    d. A DoD Component submitting a request for an exception from an applicable standard:

          (1) Identifies the particular standard for which an exception is requested.

          (2) Describes the extent of the relief requested and the period that the exception is in
effect.

       (3) Describes the anticipated impact of the exception, if any, on human health and the
environment over the period of the exception.

       (4) Describes the justification for the exception and, if a complete exception of the
standard is requested, why a partial or temporary deviation is not sufficient.

          (5) Submits the exception request to the DoD LEC.

   e. The DoD LEC, except as noted in paragraph 7f of this section, will approve, partially
approve, or deny exception requests.

    f. Where the requested exception or deviation is from an FGS provision that is derived from
a host nation standard, the DoD LEC should normally consult with the responsible host-nation
authority after consultation with the appropriate U.S. diplomatic mission. If, as a result of
consultation with host-nation authorities by the appropriate DoD LEC, it is determined that the
exception or deviation from the applicable host-nation standards should not be approved, the
applicable Combatant Commander forwards the request along with a complete report to the
ASD(EI&E), who attempts to resolve the issue through consultation with relevant authorities and
other federal agencies as appropriate.

    g. All other requests for exceptions not previously addressed in paragraph 7a of this section
are submitted with the recommendations of the DoD LEC and the applicable Combatant
Commander to the ASD(EI&E).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                               16                                   ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

   h. The DoD LEC will not approve exception requests received from within their own
Military Department. In cases when the Military Department requesting the exception is also the
DoD LEC, the exception is referred to the applicable Combatant Commander for decision.

    i. Pending the DoD LEC’s action, a Combatant Commander may, consistent with applicable
international agreements and other law, authorize temporary emergency exceptions and
deviations in countries in his or her geographic area of responsibility when the Commander
determines that such an exception or deviation is necessary to the accomplishment of an
operational mission directed by the President or Secretary of Defense. The DoD LEC,
ASD(EI&E), Combatant Commander, or commander of the theater DoD Component should
consult broadly, include the appropriate U.S. diplomatic mission, and include the responsible
host-nation authority, if appropriate, prior to exception issuance. Such exceptions will be no
broader than appropriate to accomplish the mission.


8. DISPUTE RESOLUTION. If a DoD Component disagrees with the establishment of one or
more of a DoD LEC’s FGS, the failure of the DoD LEC to fully approve an exception request, or
any other determination of the DoD LEC, the DoD Component may seek resolution of the
disagreement directly with the applicable Combatant Commander, who will issue a decision after
consultation with the DoD LEC. If the DoD Component still disagrees with the resolution of the
issue, the DoD Component’s senior environmental policy principal may refer the matter to the
ASD(EI&E) for final determination after providing notice to the CJCS.


9. POLLUTION PREVENTION GUIDANCE. Additional pollution prevention guidance is in
DoDI 4715.23 (Reference (m)).

Appendix
   Designated DoD LECs and Countries Requiring an FGS




Change 2, 08/31/2018                          17                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                        DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

                            APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3

           DESIGNATED DoD LECs AND COUNTRIES REQUIRING AN FGS


               Table. Designated DoD LECs and Countries Requiring an FGS

                  COUNTRY                                    LEC
                        UNITED STATES EUROPEAN COMMAND
    United Kingdom                       Secretary of the Air Force
    Germany                              Secretary of the Army
    Italy                                Secretary of the Navy
    Spain                                Secretary of the Navy
    Greece                               Secretary of the Navy
    Belgium                              Secretary of the Army
    Netherlands                          Secretary of the Army
    Turkey                               Secretary of the Air Force
    Azores                               Secretary of the Air Force
    Greenland                            Secretary of the Air Force
    Iceland (Doesn’t require an FGS)     Secretary of the Navy
                          UNITED STATES AFRICA COMMAND
    Kenya                                Commander, U.S. Africa Command
    Ascension Islands                    Secretary of the Air Force
                        UNITED STATES NORTHERN COMMAND
    Bahamas                              Secretary of the Navy
                         UNITED STATES CENTRAL COMMAND
    Bahrain                              Commander, U.S. Central Command
    Egypt                                Commander, U.S. Central Command
    Kuwait                               Commander, U.S. Central Command
    Oman                                 Commander, U.S. Central Command
    Qatar                                Commander, U.S. Central Command
    Saudi Arabia                         Commander, U.S. Central Command
    United Arab Emirates                 Commander, U.S. Central Command
                        UNITED STATES SOUTHERN COMMAND
    Antigua                              Secretary of the Air Force
    Cuba                                 Secretary of the Navy
                          UNITED STATES PACIFIC COMMAND
    Japan                                Commander, U.S. Forces, Japan
    Korea                                Commander, U.S. Forces, Korea
    Diego Garcia                         Secretary of the Navy




Change 2, 08/31/2018                      18             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

                                        ENCLOSURE 4

                                   DoD TEC FOR EUROPE


1. The DoD TEC for Europe:

   a. Consults with theater DoD Components and other DoD activities, as appropriate, to
accomplish their responsibilities.

   b. Provides available information, advice, and assistance to DoD Components in the
European theater regarding:

       (1) EU-driven actions and issues affecting multi-component military missions and
operations.

       (2) Proposed DoD programs and initiatives in relation to EU-directed environmental
programs and feedback regarding policy gaps or issues.

   c. Ensures that communication with other DoD Components is accomplished and proper
subject matter experts from DoD Components are engaged where necessary.

    d. Conducts meetings and outreach activities with theater DoD Components, EU and host-
nation officials, and other stakeholders, as necessary.

    e. Serves as a point of contact within the theater for non-DoD entities to reach the DoD on
significant theater defense, EU-related environmental matters.

   f. Monitors and strives for the consistent interpretation and application of DoD policies
within the EU region.

   g. Ensures that significant, non-routine communication with the EU, or its components, and
host-nation environmental agencies involving multi-component activities is coordinated.

   h. Issues theater-level guidance that conforms with this instruction.

2. The DoD TEC for Europe does not:

   a. Make unauthorized decisions or commitments for the DoD or any DoD Component.

   b. Commit the resources of another DoD Component without that DoD Component’s prior
consent.

    c. Negotiate or sign agreements or issue positions on environmental and environmentally
related matters in support of mission sustainment unless coordinated with the ASD(EI&E),
USD(P), General Counsel of the Department of Defense, and all affected DoD Component heads.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                           19                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                          DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

                                       GLOSSARY

                    PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(EI&E)         Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations, and Environment

CJCS              Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DLA               Defense Logistics Agency
DoDD              DoD Directive
DoDI              DoD Instruction

E.O.              Executive order
EU                European Union

FGS               final governing standard

LEC               Lead Environmental Component

OEBGD             Overseas Environmental Baseline Guidance Document

TEC               Theater Environmental Coordinator

USD(AT&L)         Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(P)            Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USEUCOM           U.S. European Command


                                 PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

applicable host-nation environmental standards. Specific management practices to
control pollution or objective, numeric, or qualitative pollution control standards that are
published and, in either case, are generally in effect and enforced against host-
government and private-sector activities. Laws of local governmental units are not
included unless they implement national laws that delegate authority to, or recognize the
authority of, the local governmental unit to regulate. Limitations on discharges,
emissions, effluents, and disposal are included, but procedural or administrative
requirements, such as permitting, licenses, fees, fines, penalties, or other sanctions are
not.

DoD LEC. The Secretary of a Military Department, Combatant Commander, or
Subunified Commander specifically designated as described in this instruction to execute




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             20                            GLOSSARY
                                                         DoDI 4715.05, November 1, 2013

the responsibilities prescribed in Enclosure 2 for environmental matters associated with
DoD installations in specific foreign countries.

enduring location. A location is enduring when DoD intends to maintain access and use
of that location for the foreseeable future. The following types of sites are considered
enduring for U.S. Government purposes: main operating base, forward operating site,
and cooperative security location. All three types of locations may be composed of more
than one distinct site. Enduring locations are published in the OSD-approved Enduring
Location Master List.

FGS. A comprehensive set of country-specific substantive environmental provisions;
typically technical limitations on effluent, discharges, etc., or a specific management
practice, developed in accordance with this instruction.

installation. An enduring location consisting of a base, camp, post, station, yard, center,
or other DoD activity under the operational control of the Secretary of a Military
Department or the Secretary of Defense.

international agreement. A multilateral or bilateral agreement, such as a base rights or
access agreement, a status-of-forces agreement, or any other instrument defined as a
binding international agreement in accordance with DoDD 5530.3 (Reference (n)).

OEBGD. A set of objective criteria and management practices the DoD develops in
accordance with this instruction, to protect human health and the environment, in
accordance with Reference (h).

United States. The several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealths of
Puerto Rico and the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Midway and
Wake Islands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, any other territory or possession of the United
States, and associated navigable waters, contiguous zones, and ocean waters of which the
natural resources are under the exclusive management authority of the United States.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             21                            GLOSSARY
