                              Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 5105.64
                                                                                January 10, 2013
                                                           Incorporating Change 1, March 2, 2023

                                                                                           DA&M

SUBJECT:      Defense Contract Management Agency (DCMA)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by title 10, United
States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (a)), this Directive reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5105.64
(Reference (b)) to update the mission, organization and management, responsibilities and
functions, relationships, authorities, and administration of DCMA.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. MISSION. DCMA shall perform Contract Administration Services (CAS) and Contingency
Contract Administration Services (CCAS) for the DoD, other authorized Federal agencies,
foreign governments, international organizations, and others as authorized.


5. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

   a. DCMA is a Defense Agency, in accordance with sections 191 and 192 of Reference (a),
under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)), through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition (ASD(A)).

    b. DCMA is a Combat Support Agency (CSA), in accordance with section 193 of Reference
(a) and DoDD 3000.06 (Reference (c)).
                                                                DoDD 5105.64, January 10, 2013



    c. DCMA shall consist of a Director and subordinate organizational elements established by
the Director within resources assigned by the Secretary of Defense.


6. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS. The Director, DCMA, shall:

    a. Organize, direct, and manage the DCMA and all assigned resources in accordance with
this Directive.

   b. Develop policies, plans, and procedures; develop resource requirements; ensure security
compliance by DCMA personnel; and provide for the management and direction of DCMA
overseas activities.

   c. Perform CAS functions in accordance with part 42.302 of the Federal Acquisition
Regulation (FAR) (Reference (d)) and part 242.302 of the Defense Federal Acquisition
Regulation Supplement (DFARS) (Reference (e)), as amended, except for those functions
exempted in part 242.202 of Reference (e). DCMA will not normally provide CAS support on
ammunition contracts, Navy Supervisor of Shipbuilding contracts, and Office of Naval Research
contracts, unless requested by the cognizant Military Department.

   d. In a contingency environment, in addition to CAS functions, address CCAS planning and
execution requirements and considerations specified under parts 207.105 (b)(20)(C)(7) and (8) of
DFARS Procedures, Guidance, and Information (Reference (f)), as well as part 225.7404 of
Reference (e) and part 225.7404 of Reference (f).

   e. Administer, manage, and operate the Defense Procurement Management Review program.

  f. Provide membership on the Defense Acquisition Regulations Council in accordance with
DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5000.35 (Reference (g)).

    g. Plan for and perform CCAS in support of the CJCS and the Combatant Commanders in
the planning and execution of military operations, consistent with DCMA’s other established
responsibilities and functions and in accordance with Reference (c).

   h. In the execution of CCAS:

        (1) Exercise the contractual authority (i.e., consistent with FAR and DFARS Head of
Contracting Activity Authority responsibilities for DCMA requirements) and fulfill the
responsibilities of a supporting agency to Combatant Commanders planning or executing
military operations.

        (2) Establish and resource sufficient positions to support requirements for DCMA
personnel to deploy into a theater of operations and to ensure these personnel are properly
trained and prepared.




Change 1, 03/02/2023                            2
                                                               DoDD 5105.64, January 10, 2013


    i. Design and manage DCMA programs and activities to improve standards of performance,
economy, and efficiency and demonstrate DCMA’s attention to the requirements of its
organizational customers, both internal and external to the DoD, consistent with the requirements
of the Secretary of Defense Biennial Review of Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities.

   j. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Secretary of Defense, Deputy
Secretary of Defense, the USD(AT&L), or the ASD(A).


7. RELATIONSHIPS

   a. In the performance of assigned responsibilities and functions, the Director, DCMA, shall:

       (1) Report directly to the ASD(A).

      (2) Use existing systems, facilities, and services of the DoD and other Federal agencies,
when possible, to avoid duplication and to achieve maximum efficiency and economy.

       (3) Be responsive to the CJCS for combat support and other related activities, as
appropriate. For these purposes, the CJCS is authorized to communicate directly with the
Director, DCMA, and may task the Director, DCMA, to the extent coordinated with the
USD(AT&L) and the ASD(A).

       (4) Coordinate and exchange information with the OSD Principal Staff Assistants
(PSAs) and the Heads of other DoD Components having collateral or related responsibilities and
functions.

   b. The CJCS shall task DCMA to provide CCAS capabilities in the context of Secretary of
Defense-approved deployment or execution orders and, in accordance with Reference (c),
execute those responsibilities applicable to DCMA’s status as a CSA.

    c. The USD(AT&L) shall, in accordance with Reference (c), execute those PSA
responsibilities applicable to DCMA’s status as a CSA.

    d. The Combatant Commanders shall, in accordance with Reference (c), execute those
responsibilities applicable to DCMA’s status as a CSA and shall:

       (1) Request DCMA CCAS capabilities through the Joint Capabilities Requirements
Management System (JCRMS) and validate a Joint Manning Document (JMD) for the
performance of a CCAS mission, when and where appropriate, to support contingency
operations.

       (2) Review the anti-terrorism status of DCMA activities within their respective
geographic area of responsibility in accordance with DoDI 2000.12 (Reference (h)).




Change 1, 03/02/2023                           3
                                                                DoDD 5105.64, January 10, 2013


       (3) Approve access and transportation to areas of contingency operations for the
Director, DCMA, and the CCAS Commander (DCMA-International), as required.

   e. The Director, Defense Logistics Agency (DLA), under the authority, direction, and
control of the USD(AT&L), through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Logistics and
Materiel Readiness, shall ensure the DLA Joint Contingency Acquisition Support Office
provides planning and assistance to Combatant Commands regarding CCAS and the role of
DCMA as a CSA.

   f. The OSD PSAs and the Heads of other DoD Components shall coordinate with the
Director, DCMA, on all matters under their purview related to the authorities, responsibilities,
and functions assigned to the Director, DCMA.


8. AUTHORITIES. The Director, DCMA, is hereby delegated authority to:

    a. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry out
assigned responsibilities and functions, including the transmission of requests for advice and
assistance. Communications to the Military Departments shall be transmitted through the
Secretaries of the Military Departments, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law or
directed by the Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the Combatant
Commanders normally shall be transmitted through the CJCS, except those communications
dealing solely with CAS or CCAS functions.

    b. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the Legislative Branch,
State and local officials, members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments, as
appropriate, to carry out assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with
representatives of the Legislative Branch shall be conducted through the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Legislative Affairs and the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief
Financial Officer, Department of Defense, as appropriate, and be consistent with the DoD
Legislative Program.

   c. Obtain reports and information, in accordance with DoDI 8910.01 (Reference (i)), as
necessary, to carry out assigned responsibilities and functions.

    d. Prescribe procedures, standards, and practices governing the execution of assigned
responsibilities and functions.

   e. Exercise the administrative authorities contained in Enclosure 2.


9. ADMINISTRATION

    a. The Director, DCMA, shall be appointed by the Secretary of Defense with
recommendations provided by the CJCS and the USD(AT&L).




Change 1, 03/02/2023                             4
                                                            DoDD 5105.64, January 10, 2013


   b. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

        (1) Assign military personnel to DCMA in accordance with approved authorizations and
established procedures for assignment to joint duty.

        (2) When force structure sourcing of military personnel in support of CCAS leaves
operational deficiencies, assist in providing civilian expeditionary workforce personnel to
support in-theater contract management requirements. During contingency operations, JMD
requirements for the performance of the CCAS mission will be sourced through the JCRMS, to
balance the availability of Military Department and CSA-assigned military and civilian
expeditionary workforce. Requests for CCAS personnel shall be in accordance with CJCS
Instruction 1301.01D (Reference (j)), as applicable.

      (3) Inform the USD(AT&L) when unable to provide requested personnel and provide
recommendations to resolve or mitigate shortfalls.

    c. The USD(AT&L) shall, in coordination with the CJCS, when the Military Departments do
not adequately source DCMA military billets and cause operational deficiencies, assist DCMA
resourcing efforts to ensure DCMA can fulfill its CAS and CCAS mission requirements.


10. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


11. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance removes the expiration language
in accordance with DoD Instruction 5025.01 (Reference (k)).


12. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective January 10, 2013.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Delegations of Authority
Glossary




Change 1, 03/02/2023                           5
                                                          DoDD 5105.64, January 10, 2013


                                     ENCLOSURE 1

                                     REFERENCES


(a) Sections 191, 192, and 193 of title 10, United States Code
(b) DoD Directive 5105.64, “Defense Contract Management Agency (DCMA),”
    September 27, 2000 (hereby cancelled)
(c) DoD Directive 3000.06, “Combat Support Agencies,” July 10, 2007
(d) Federal Acquisition Regulation, current edition
(e) Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement, current edition
(f) Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement Procedures, Guidance, and
    Information, current edition
(g) DoD Instruction 5000.35, “Defense Acquisition Regulations (DAR) System,”
    October 21, 2008
(h) DoD Instruction 2000.12, “DoD Antiterrorism (AT) Program,” March 1, 2012
(i) DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting” March 6, 2007
(j) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 1301.01D, “Joint Individual
    Augmentation Procedures,” February 12, 2011
(k) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended




Change 1, 03/02/2023                        6                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDD 5105.64, January 10, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                               DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY


Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), and in accordance with DoD policies and issuances,
the Director, DCMA, or in the absence of the Director, the person acting for the Director, is
hereby delegated authority as required in the administration and operation of the DCMA to:

    a. Exercise the powers vested in the Secretary of Defense by sections 301, 302(b), 3101, and
5107 of title 5, U.S.C. on the employment, direction, and general administration of DCMA
civilian personnel.

    b. Fix rates of pay of wage-rate employees exempted from the Classification Act of 1949 by
section 5102 of title 5, U.S.C. on the basis of rates established under the Federal Wage System.
In fixing such rates, the Director, DCMA, shall follow the wage schedule established by the DoD
Wage Fixing Authority.

    c. Administer oaths of office to those entering the Executive Branch of the Federal
Government or any other oath required by law in connection with employment therein, in
accordance with section 2903 of title 5, U.S.C., and designate in writing, as may be necessary,
officers and employees of the DCMA to perform this function.

    d. Establish a DCMA Incentive Awards Board, and pay cash awards to, and incur necessary
expenses for the honorary recognition of, civilian employees of the Government whose
suggestions, inventions, superior accomplishments, or other personal efforts, including special
acts or services, benefit or affect the DCMA, in accordance with section 4503 of title 5, U.S.C.,
Office of Personnel Management regulations, and DoDI 1400.25.

   e. Maintain an official seal and attest to the authenticity of official records under that seal.

    f. Use advisory committees and employ temporary or intermittent experts or consultants, as
approved by the Secretary of Defense or the Director of Administration and Management, for the
performance of DCMA functions consistent with sections 173 and 174 of title 10, U.S.C.; section
3109(b) of title 5, U.S.C.; the Federal Advisory Committee Act (Appendix 2 of title 5, U.S.C.);
and DoDI 5105.04.

   g. In accordance with Executive Order 10450, “Security Requirements for Government
Employment,” April 27, 1953; Executive Order 12968, “Access to Classified Information,”
August 4, 1995; and DoDD 5200.2, as appropriate:

       (1) Designate any position in the DCMA as a “sensitive” position.

        (2) Authorize, in exceptional circumstances where official functions must be performed
prior to the completion of an investigation and adjudication process, temporary access to a



Change 1, 03/02/2023                              7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5105.64, January 10, 2013


sensitive position in the DCMA for a limited period to individuals for whom an appropriate
investigation is underway.

        (3) Initiate personnel security investigations and, if necessary, in the interest of national
security, suspend a security clearance for personnel assigned, detailed to, or employed by the
DCMA. Any actions under this subparagraph shall be taken in accordance with procedures
prescribed in DoD 5200.2-R.

   h. Authorize and approve:

        (1) Temporary duty travel for military personnel assigned or detailed to the DCMA in
accordance with Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1, “Uniformed Service Members,”
current edition.

       (2) Travel for DCMA civilian personnel in accordance with Joint Travel Regulations
(JTR), Volume 2, “Department of Defense Civilian Personnel,” current edition.

       (3) Invitational travel to non-DoD personnel whose consultative, advisory, or other
highly specialized technical services are required in a capacity that is directly related to, or in
connection with, DCMA activities, in accordance with JTR, Volume 2.

       (4) Overtime work for DCMA civilian personnel in accordance with section 5542 of title
5, U.S.C. and part 550 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations.

     i. Approve the expenditure of funds available for travel by military personnel assigned or
detailed to the DCMA for expenses incident to attendance at meetings of technical, scientific,
professional, or other similar organizations in such instances when the approval of the Secretary
of Defense, or designee, is required by section 412 of title 37, U.S.C. and sections 4110 and 4111
of title 5, U.S.C.

   j. Develop, establish, and maintain an active and continuing Records Management Program,
pursuant to section 3102 of title 44, U.S.C. and DoDD 5015.2.

   k. Use the Government-Wide Purchase Card for making appropriate purchases of material
and services, other than personal services, for the DCMA when it is determined more
advantageous and consistent with the best interests of the Government.

    l. Authorize the publication of advertisements, notices, or proposals in newspapers,
magazines, or other public periodicals, as required for the effective administration and operation
of the DCMA, in accordance with section 3702, title 44, U.S.C.

     m. Establish and maintain, for the functions assigned, an appropriate publications system for
the promulgation of common supply and service regulations, instructions, and reference
documents, and changes thereto, pursuant to the policies and procedures prescribed in Reference
(k).




Change 1, 03/02/2023                               8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5105.64, January 10, 2013


    n. Enter into interdepartmental and intragovernmental support agreements, as the receiver or
the supplier, with the other DoD Components, non-DoD Federal Government departments and
agencies, and State and local governments, as required for effective performance of DCMA
responsibilities and functions, in accordance with section 1535 of title 31, U.S.C. and DoDI
4000.19.

   o. Enter into and administer contracts, directly or through a Military Department, a DoD
contract administration services component, or other Federal agency, as appropriate, for supplies,
equipment, and services required to accomplish the mission of the DCMA. To the extent that
any law or Executive order specifically limits the exercise of such authority to persons at the
Secretarial level of a Military Department, such authority shall be exercised by the appropriate
Under Secretary or Assistant Secretary of Defense.

    p. Establish and maintain appropriate property accounts for the DCMA and appoint boards
of survey, approve reports of survey, relieve personal liability, and drop accountability for
DCMA property contained in the authorized property accounts that has been lost, damaged,
stolen, destroyed, or otherwise rendered unserviceable, in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations.

    q. Issue the necessary security regulations for the protection of property and places under the
jurisdiction of the Director, DCMA, pursuant to DoDI 5200.08.

    r. Lease property under the control of the DCMA, under terms that will promote the national
defense or that will be in the public interest, pursuant to section 2667 of title 10, U.S.C.

   s. Redelegate these authorities as appropriate, and in writing, except as otherwise
specifically indicated in this Directive or as otherwise provided by law or regulation.




Change 1, 03/02/2023                             9                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5105.64, January 10, 2013


                                      PART I. GLOSSARY

                             ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


 ASD(A)          Assistant Secretary of Defense for Acquisition


 CJCS            Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
 CAS             Contract Administrative Services
 CCAS            Contingency Contract Administrative Services
 CSA             Combat Support Agency

 DCMA            Defense Contract Management Agency
 DFARS           Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement
 DoDD            DoD Directive
 DLA             Defense Logistics Agency
 DoDI            DoD Instruction


 FAR             Federal Acquisition Regulation


 JCRMS           Joint Capabilities Requirements Management System
 JMD             Joint Manning Document
 JTR             Joint Travel Regulations


 PSA             Principal Staff Assistant

 U.S.C.          United States Code
 USD(AT&L) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics



                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

This term and its definition are for the purpose of this Directive.


CCAS. Those services, outlined in part 42.302 of Reference (d) and part 242.302 of Reference
(e), performed in support of contingency operations.



Change 1, 03/02/2023                             10                                 GLOSSARY
