                             Department of Defense

                           INSTRUCTION
                                                                         NUMBER 1225.9
                                                                        December 17, 2001



                                                                                   ASD(RA)

SUBJECT: Billeting for Reserve Component Members

References: (a) Title 10, United States Code
            (b) Title 37, United States Code
            (c) DoD 4165.63-M, "DoD Housing Management," September 1993


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction establishes policy and assigns responsibilities under references (a) and
(b) for providing billeting or lodging in kind for Reserve component members when
performing active duty or inactive duty training.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments (including the Coast Guard when, by agreement with the Department of
Transportation, it is operating as a Military Service of that Department), the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred collectively
to as "the DoD Components"). The term "Military Service," as used herein, refers to the
Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.


3. DEFINITIONS

     3.1. Active Duty. Full-time duty in a Uniformed Service, full-time training duty,
annual training duty, full-time National Guard duty, and attendance, while in the Active
service, at a Service school, by law, or by the Secretary concerned.
                                                        DODI 1225.9, December 17, 2001


      3.2. Inactive Duty Training. Authorized training that members of a Reserve
component (RC) who are not on active duty perform and that consists of regularly
scheduled unit or individual training periods, additional training periods, and equivalent
training.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy to provide Reserve component personnel who travel more than 50 miles
from the member's residence to perform active duty or inactive duty training with
billeting by confirming their reservations to the same extent as Active component
members traveling under orders away from the permanent duty station.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

     5.1. The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Installations, under the Under
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, shall oversee billeting
practices according to the policies in this Instruction.

     5.2. The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Reserve Affairs), under the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall:

          5.2.1. Prescribe guidance:

                5.2.1.1. Requiring that Reserve component members who must travel
more than 50 miles from the member's residence to perform inactive duty training receive
billeting as 10 U.S.C. 12604 (reference (a)) authorizes.

                5.2.1.2. Providing the Secretary concerned with the discretionary
authority to provide Reserve component members who are performing active duty or
inactive duty training and are not otherwise entitled to travel and transportation allowance
with lodging in kind, as provided in 37 U.S.C. 404(i) (reference (b)), when transient
Government housing is not available.

       5.2.2. Monitor that Secretaries of the Military Departments and the
Commandant of the Coast Guard comply with this Instruction.

    5.3. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Commandant of the Coast
Guard shall:

         5.3.1. Provide billeting for Reserve component members as paragraph 6.1.,
below, specifies.




                                             2
                                                        DODI 1225.9, December 17, 2001


           5.3.2. Provide lodging in kind to Reserve component members when the
Secretary concerned authorizes it, and when transient Government housing is not
available, as paragraph 6.5., below, provides.


6. PROCEDURES

     6.1. Installation commanders shall provide Reserve component members who are
performing active duty or inactive duty training with billeting in transient,
unaccompanied personnel housing by confirming their reservation as provided in Chapter
5, subparagraph C5.1.3.13.1. of DoD 4165.63-M (reference (c)). Reserve component
personnel shall have the same priority for confirming reservations as Active component
members who are traveling under orders away from their permanent duty station as
provided in 10 U.S.C. 12602 (reference (a)).

     6.2. The installation commander may set the policy for advance confirmed
reservations, but that policy shall apply equally to Active and Reserve component
members.

      6.3. The appropriate commander or unit official shall determine who is eligible for
billeting under paragraph 6.1., above, as determined by official military records, by
providing the housing manager with the names of the Reserve component members.

     6.4. If a Reserve component member arrives at the training site, requests billeting,
and cannot establish his or her eligibility, and if the appropriate commander or unit
official has not identified him or her as an eligible member under paragraph 6.3., above,
the installation commander may:

         6.4.1. Provide the member billeting, according to Chapter 5, subparagraph
C5.1.2.13.1. of reference (c).

          6.4.2. Require the member to verify his or her eligibility the following day.

      6.5. When transient Government housing is not available or is inadequate, the
Secretary concerned may provide lodging, according to 37 U.S.C. 404(i) (reference (b)),
for the Reserve component in the manner he or she would for members entitled to travel
and transportation allowances under Section 404(a) of reference (b). According to
Section 404(i)(3) of reference (b), the Secretary concerned may pay the service charge
and other expenses for this lodging out of funds appropriated for operation and
maintenance using the Government charge card.




                                            3
                                                 DODI 1225.9, December 17, 2001



7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




                                             4
