                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 6000.08
                                                                              January 22, 2014
                                          Incorporating Change 1, Effective November 30, 2017

                                                                                     USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Defense Health Program Research and Clinical Investigation Programs

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 6000.08 (Reference (a)) in accordance with the
authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02 (Reference (b)) and DoDD 5136.01 (Reference (c)).

   b. Establishes DoD policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for funding and
administration of Research and Clinical Investigation Programs (CIP) funded by the Defense
Health Program (DHP) appropriation.


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD
Components”).

   b. Encompasses all elements of research and CIP relating to the medical mission of the
Military Health System (MHS) funded through DHP. CIP is funded by DHP operation and
maintenance (O&M) funds and DHP research is comprised of research, development, test, and
evaluation (RDT&E) funds.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. DHP-funded medical research and CIP are essential missions of the MHS, intended to
achieve these objectives:
                                                                DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


        (1) Development and employment of health readiness solutions that protect, treat, and
optimize the health and performance of the total force as envisioned in the Force Health
Protection Concept of Operations (Reference (d)) or other analyses or guidance the DoD’s
leadership may establish.

        (2) Improve the quality of patient care in the MHS by improving medical knowledge,
practices, materiel, devices, pharmaceuticals, and by providing the DoD beneficiary population
with access to evidence-based diagnosis and treatment.

       (3) Maintain a medical research portfolio that is responsive to the needs of the MHS and
the dynamic nature of the health sciences.

   b. CIP is an essential component of medical care and teaching. CIP will:

       (1) Support Graduate Health Sciences Education (GHSE) and other allied health
programs of the Military Services.

       (2) Promote high professional standing and accreditation of health education and training
programs within the MHS.

     c. MHS facilities, military research laboratories, military treatment facilities, and dental
treatment facilities, which collaborate with extramural researchers under DHP-funded grants,
cooperative agreements, or procurement contracts, will be reimbursed for their direct and indirect
costs in accordance with DoD 7000.14-R, Volume 11a, (Reference (e)). These facilities will be
reimbursed either directly from the responsible or appropriate government resource management
office, or from the extramural award recipients via cooperative research and development
agreements (CRADAs), agreements carried out under the authority of DoDI 5535.11 (Reference
(f)), intergovernmental agreements, or other such mechanisms as allowed by law or regulation.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. Enclosure 3.


6. INFORMATION COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS. The Clinical Investigation Program
Annual Report, referred to in paragraph 2d of Enclosure 2 of this instruction, has been assigned
report control symbol DD-HA(A)2259 in accordance with the procedures in DoD Manual
8910.01 (Reference (g)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 1, 11/30/2017                            2
                                                           DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective January 22, 2014.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 1, 11/30/2017                        3
                                                                                               DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................5

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................6

     ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)) ..............6
     OSD AND DoD COMPONENT HEADS THAT CONDUCT OR SUPPORT RESEARCH
     AND CIP ....................................................................................................................................6
     DIRECTOR, DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY (DHA) .............................................................7

ENCLOSURE 3: PROCEDURES ..................................................................................................8

     DOD COMPONENT MANAGEMENT PLAN ........................................................................8
     DHP EXTRAMURAL FUNDING AND ADMINISTRATION ACTIVITIES .......................9
     OVERALL FUNDING AND ADMINISTRATION ACTIVITIES..........................................9

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................12

     PART I: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................12
     PART II: DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................12




Change 1, 11/30/2017                                                   4                                                      CONTENTS
                                                             DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a) DoD Instruction 6000.08, “Funding and Administration of Clinical Investigation
    Programs,” December 3, 2007 (hereby cancelled)
(b) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c) DoD Directive 5136.01, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA)),”
    September 30, 2013, as amended
(d) Force Health Protection Concept of Operations (CONOPS), November 17, 2011
(e) DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation,” dates vary
    by volume
(f) DoD Instruction 5535.11, “Availability of Samples, Drawings, Information, Equipment,
    Materials, and Certain Services to Non-DoD Persons and Entities,” March 19, 2012,
    as amended
(g) DoD Manual 8910.01, “DoD Information Collections Manual,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(h) DoD Directive 5134.3, “Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E),”
    November 3, 2003
(i) DoD Directive 5136.13, “Defense Health Agency (DHA),” September 30, 2013
(j) DoD Instruction 3216.02, “Protection of Human Subjects and Adherence to Ethical
    Standards in DoD-Supported Research,” November 8, 2011, as amended
(k) Title 32, Code of Federal Regulations
(l) DoD Instruction 3216.01, “Use of Animals in DoD Programs,” September 13, 2010, as
amended
(m) Section 742 of Public Law 104-201, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
    1997,” September 23, 1996
(n) Title 10, United States Code
(o) Title 15, United States Code
(p) DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” April 25, 2013, as amended
(q) DoD Directive 5500.07, “Standards of Conduct,” November 29, 2007
(r) DoD 5500.07-R, “Joint Ethics Regulation (JER),” August 30, 1993, as amended
(s) DoD Instruction 6000.16, “Military Health Support for Stability Operations,” May 17, 2010
(t) Title 31, United States Code
(u) DoD Directive 5535.3, “DoD Domestic Technology Transfer (T2) Program,” May 21, 1999
(v) DoD Instruction 5535.8, “DoD Technology Transfer (T2) Program,” May 14, 1999
(w) Section 501(c)(3) of Title 26, United States Code




Change 1,                                    5
11/30/2017                                                                   ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)). Under
the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness, the ASD(HA):

    a. Exercises authority, direction, and control over DHP research and CIP as they relate to
this instruction.

    b. Monitors implementation of this instruction through the process of review and approval of
DoD Component plans for executing CIP funds and DHP research funds, reports, and briefings
in accordance with section 3 above the signature line.

   c. Conducts site visits and program reviews as appropriate.

    d. Oversees the execution of both technical and financial matters for CIP and DHP funded
research to ensure programs are meeting the objectives stated in accordance with the policy in
this instruction.

    e. Develops and issues strategic guidance in coordination with the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Research and Engineering in accordance with section 4 of DoDD 5134.3 (Reference
(h)).


2. OSD AND DOD COMPONENT HEADS THAT CONDUCT OR SUPPORT RESEARCH
AND CIP. The OSD and DoD Component heads that conduct or support research and CIP
covered by this instruction:

    a. Develop, issue, and monitor their Component’s management plan. The Component’s
implementing policies and procedures for the administration of DHP research and CIP funding
will be contained in the management plan.

       (1) The authority and responsibility for implementing and overseeing the Component
management plan will only be delegated to a single, senior official at the general or flag officer,
Senior Executive Service, or equivalent level, or higher.

       (2) For RDT&E, Component management plans will be integrated by and across
components and evaluated and approved by the ASD(HA) or a designee on the basis of
interoperability, effectiveness, and elimination of unwarranted duplication.

    b. Establish and oversee Component implementing policies and procedures in support of this
instruction. Component policies may be more restrictive than the requirements in this
instruction, but they may not be less restrictive.

Change 1,                                        6
11/30/2017                                                                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014



    c. In coordination with the Office of Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs
(OASD(HA)), strengthen ties to other federal and non-federal medical research programs to
facilitate the transition of MHS-related candidate medical products to advanced development or
clinical practice guidelines.

    d. Report to the ASD(HA), or a designee, as requested on CIP and DHP funded research
activities conducted in accordance with this instruction. Separately, for CIP, at the beginning of
the fiscal year, OASD(HA) will provide the list of data elements to be included in the annual
report for that year.


3. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY (DHA). Under the authority, direction, and
control of the ASD(HA) and DoDD 5136.13 (Reference (i)), the Director, DHA, will, in addition
to responsibilities under section 2 of this enclosure, with respect to other responsibilities and
functions of the DHA:

   a. Implement this instruction.

   b. Support the responsibilities and functions of the ASD(HA) under this instruction.




Change 1,                                        7
11/30/2017                                                                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. DOD COMPONENT MANAGEMENT PLAN. In order to accomplish the responsibilities
described in section 2 of Enclosure 2, DoD Component management plans must:

   a. Incorporate the minimum requirements in this enclosure.

   b. Include policies and procedures that:

       (1) Comply with this instruction.

       (2) Collect the data required for reports to the ASD(HA).

       (3) Establish Component headquarters review and oversight of activities conducted in
accordance with this instruction.

      (4) Delineate the management and administration of funds for research and CIP
conducted in accordance with this instruction.

       (5) Collect CIP performance metrics per the data call for this instruction.

        (6) Ensure research involving human and animal subjects is appropriately resourced to
support the requirements of DoD policy and federal law as contained in DoDI 3216.02
(Reference (j)), part 219 of Title 32, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (k)), and
DoDI 3216.01 (Reference (l)). This will include the eligibility of human subject volunteers to
participate and will address research related injuries.

       (7) Reimburse MHS facilities for research-related expenses in accordance with federal
law, DoD issuances, including Reference (e), and Military Department regulations.

         (8) Manage records for research and CIP conducted in accordance with this instruction
(e.g., for CIP use of the MHS-wide web based electronic research management tool for
workflow processing).

       (9) Provide education and training for implementation, management, and oversight in
accordance with the policy in this instruction.

       (10) Integrate applicable policy and guidance.

  c. For each activity identified in paragraph 1b in this enclosure, identify the responsible
Component office.




Change 1,                                       8
11/30/2017                                                                           ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


2. DHP EXTRAMURAL FUNDING AND ADMINISTRATION ACTIVITIES

    a. Before committing or spending DHP funds on an extramural medical research project that
involves human subjects and is conducted solely by a non-federal entity, the research project
protocol must be reviewed through an external peer review process in accordance with section
742 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1997 (Reference (m)).

    b. DHP funds must not be used to support an extramural medical research activity in a
college or university if such support violates section 2361 of Title 10, United States Code
(U.S.C.) (Reference (n)).


3. OVERALL FUNDING AND ADMINISTRATION ACTIVITIES

   a. All research activities and clinical investigations (CIs) using DHP funds must refer to
Reference (e) for all financial management policy and guidance.

    b. CIP infrastructure support is funded with DHP O&M approved by Congress in the annual
DoD Appropriation Act. CIP may receive funding support from DHP RDT&E funds or other
federal and non-federal sources to the extent permissible by law and federal regulations.

    c. OSD and DoD Components will give priority to authorizing CIP and DHP funded
research projects that are aligned with the strategic guidance from the ASD(HA).

    d. DoD Components will accept support from other federal sources in accordance with
section 2358 of Reference (n) (e.g., National Institutes of Health and U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention), only when it is consistent with and promotes the accomplishment of
valid mission objectives.

    e. DoD Components will accept support from non-federal sources only when it is consistent
with and promotes the accomplishment of valid mission objectives. Support from non-federal
sources is authorized as provided by law, DoD issuances, Military Department regulations, and
this instruction. DoD Components will establish management controls to ensure legal review of
the acceptance and use of such funds and to comply with any other procedures established by the
ASD(HA).

   f. In addition to core funding, DHP-funded medical research, including CIs, may, if
consistent with the management controls referred to in paragraph 3e of this enclosure, be funded
and administered through any mechanism authorized by law, DoD issuances, and Military
Department regulations, including, but not limited to:

       (1) Contracts.

       (2) Grants.

       (3) Cooperative agreements.

Change 1,                                       9
11/30/2017                                                                       ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014



       (4) CRADA pursuant to section 3710a of Title 15, U.S.C. (Reference (o)).

       (5) Agreements pursuant to section 2539b of Reference (n).

     (6) Agreements through the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
(USUHS).

       (7) Gifts in accordance with section 2601 of Reference (n) and volume 12, chapter 30 of
Reference (e).

       (8) Interagency and interservice agreements, including support agreements in accordance
with DoDI 4000.19 (Reference (p)).

       (9) Royalties, in accordance with section 3710c of Reference (o).

    g. All research activities and CIs using DHP funds must ensure procurement contracts,
grants, and cooperative agreements for DHP-funded awards that provide for the use of MHS
facilities, include in their award budgets appropriate reimbursement for direct and indirect costs
to such facilities, in accordance with Reference (e), and other relevant DoD issuances and
guidance.

    h. In all cases involving determination of reasonable charges for collaborations or
cooperation with non-federal entities, the parties involved in the collaboration or cooperation
will execute a written agreement or, in the case of a gift, a written acknowledgment that will
describe:

         (1) What the non-federal entity will provide in terms of specific support and the
activities it will carry out in connection with that support. Before approval by the designated
DoD senior official, the parties involved in the agreement will specify for personal property a
description of property, quantity provided, projected use and its ultimate disposition (including
disposition of any item(s) on loan).

       (2) The conditions accepted by the designated DoD senior official for provision of the
non-federal support.

       (3) The manner in which designated personnel (e.g., research or CIP personnel) will
handle data, intellectual property, and any other property rights.

    i. All research activities and CIs using DHP funds must ensure DoD senior officials accept
non-federal support for medical research and CIP only in strict compliance with the program
integrity requirements in DoDD 5500.07 (Reference (q)), DoD 5500.07-R (Reference (r)), and in
accordance with the policy in this instruction:

       (1) Acceptance of non-federal support will be well documented and transparent and avoid
the appearance of preferential treatment of any entity or other impropriety. Where non-

Change 1,                                       10
11/30/2017                                                                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


competitive selection is permitted under law (e.g., under CRADAs or simplified acquisition
procedures), local procedures will ensure appropriate safeguards and justification.

       (2) Except as specifically authorized by law, DoD healthcare personnel are prohibited
from accepting any compensation from any non-federal source for performing duties within the
scope of the CIP. This includes any off-duty employment in connection with a CI activity.

      (3) DoD personnel will not accept payment in connection with a CI activity or direct
payment to third parties, including to non-federal entities that support DoD CI activities.

       (4) DoD personnel will not direct the use of funds of a non-federal entity in connection
with a CI activity except as specifically provided by an applicable approved agreement.

       (5) DoD personnel will not initiate requests for gifts. They may:

            (a) Complete standard applications for, and respond to announcements of, non-
federal research grants.

           (b) Initiate non-binding discussions with non-federal parties regarding potential
collaborations that would be carried out under CRADAs, material transfer agreements, and non-
disclosure agreements.

    j. DoD Components will adhere to additional requirements for collaborations with
extramural researchers when an intramural investigator is named as a collaborator in a proposal
submitted by an extramural investigator. In such cases:

        (1) The extramural investigator must include, with the proposal, a letter from the
intramural collaborator’s commanding officer or facility director that authorizes the involvement
of the intramural collaborator.

       (2) The intramural collaborator will ensure applicable and reasonable reimbursements
for MHS facility support are included in the submitted extramural proposal, e.g., through
coordination of estimated applicable costs with the local resource management office or relevant
technology transfer office.




Change 1,                                      11
11/30/2017                                                                       ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 ASD(HA)                     Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs


 CI                          clinical investigation
 CIP                         clinical investigation program
 CRADA                       cooperative research and development agreement


 DHA                         Defense Health Agency
 DHP                         Defense Health Program
 DoDD                        DoD directive
 DoDI                        DoD instruction


 GHSE                        graduate health sciences education


 MHS                         Military Health System


 OASD(HA)                    Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs
 O&M                         operation and maintenance


 RDT&E                       research, development, test, and evaluation


 U.S.C.                      United States Code
 USUHS                       Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences

                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.

agreements through the USUHS. The DoD may, in connection with USUHS activities, carry out
cooperative enterprises in medical research, medical consultation, and medical education in
accordance with section 2113(g) of Reference (n). These enterprises may be engaged through
contracts with, grants to or from, and personal services from nonprofit entities; they may accept
gifts from these or other entities.

CI. An organized inquiry into and possible development of knowledge or products related to
clinical health problems for any conditions of concern in providing healthcare to the
beneficiaries of the MHS including active duty personnel, dependents, and retired personnel. CIs

Change 1,                                        12
11/30/2017                                                                           GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


represent a special category of healthcare research. CIs are intended to improve quality of
medical, dental, nursing and allied health science care provided to beneficiaries of DoD health
services or support the GHSE programs, other allied health programs of the Military Services,
and USUHS.

CIP. Programs in which CIs are conducted for health sciences education to develop the MHS
Force, or CIs are conducted for the advancement of medical science and its military and
nonmilitary application to patient care. CIP is funded with DHP O&M funds and may have
procurement funds for purchase of equipment as applicable. The CIP may receive DHP RDT&E
funding for CIs on health problems encountered by DoD eligible beneficiaries if such
investigations are in support of human clinical trials in the DHP RDT&E research areas. The
CIP may receive funding on a case by case basis from non-DHP research funds in accordance
with applicable federal laws and written agreements with the non-DHP sponsor. Investigations
that address medical stability operations must follow DoDI 6000.16 (Reference (s)). CIs may be
conducted with funds obtained by grants from another federal agency or other non-federal
sources as permissible by law and federal regulations. Military contingency requirements take
precedence over the requirements of the CIP.

contract. A mutually binding legal relationship obligating the seller to furnish the supplies or
services (including construction) and the buyer to pay for them. It includes all types of
commitments that obligate the U.S. Government to an expenditure of appropriated funds and
that, except as otherwise authorized, are in writing. In addition to bilateral instruments, contracts
include (but are not limited to) awards and notices of awards; job orders or task letters issued
under basic ordering agreements; letter contracts; orders, such as purchase orders, under which
the contract becomes effective by written acceptance or performance; and bilateral contract
modifications. Contracts do not include grants and cooperative agreements covered by sections
6304 and 6305 of Title 31, U.S.C. (Reference (t)).

cooperative agreement. A legal instrument which, consistent with section 6305 of Reference (s),
is used to enter into the same kind of relationships as a federal grant, except that substantial
involvement is expected between the DoD and the recipient when carrying out the activity
contemplated by the cooperative agreement. The term does not include “cooperative research
and development agreements” as defined in section 3710a of Reference (o).

CRADA. An agreement that DoD Components, the Military Departments and USUHS may
enter into to conduct research including CI studies in accordance with section 3710a of
Reference (o), DoDD 5535.3 (Reference (u)), and DoDI 5535.8 (Reference (v)). A CRADA
provides the preferred mechanism to establish collaborative relationships with industry and
academic institutions.

data call. The document OASD(HA) provides at the beginning of the fiscal year to the CIP
representatives of the Military Services, Defense Health Agency, and USUHS with the list of
data elements to be included in the annual report for that year.




Change 1,                                        13
11/30/2017                                                                             GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


DHP appropriation. A single appropriation consisting of operation and maintenance; research,
development, test, and evaluation; and procurement funds designed to finance the non-military
personnel requirements of the MHS.

DoD MHS. The DoD medical and dental programs, personnel, facilities, and other assets of the
Military Services operating pursuant to Chapter 55 of Reference (n) by which the DoD provides
health care services to the Military Services during military operations and supports the military
mission by fostering, protecting, sustaining, and restoring health. It also provides the direction,
resources, healthcare providers, and other means necessary for promoting the health of the
beneficiary population (e.g., members of the Military Services, their family members, and others
entitled to DoD medical care). These include developing and promoting health awareness issues
to educate customers, discovering and mitigating environmentally based health threats, providing
health services, including preventive care and problem intervention, Multi-Service Markets with
enhanced authorities, and improving the means and methods for maintaining the health of the
beneficiary population by constantly evaluating the performance of the healthcare services
system.

GHSE. Programs of the uniformed services and USUHS, such as Graduate Medical Education,
Graduate Dental Education, Graduate Nursing Education, and Graduate Allied Health Science
Education that promote high professional standing and accreditation of health education
programs.

gift. Any donation of funds, or real or personal property from a non-federal source for which
there is no compensation or promise of compensation on behalf of the donor. A gift may be
offered and accepted with or without specified limitations on ownership or use (i.e., may be a
conditional or unconditional gift). Service and USUHS GHSE programs may use gifts of funds
or personal property to support a CI study under procedures prescribed by sections 2601 and
2113 of Reference (n). Service and GHSE programs may accept a grant not covered by
agreements through the USUHS in accordance with sections 2601 and 2113 of Reference (n).

grant. When provided from a federal agency, a grant is a legal instrument used to enter into a
relationship, the principal purpose of which is to transfer a thing of value (e.g., money) to the
recipient to carry out a public purpose of support or stimulation authorized by law. Substantial
involvement between the DoD and the recipient is not expected when carrying out the activity
contemplated by the grant. When provided by a non-federal entity, a grant is an award of funds,
services, or real or personal property, for the purpose of stimulating higher learning or research,
from a corporation, foundation, trust, institution, or other entity that is not organized for profit
and does not provide any net earnings to shareholders or individuals.

infrastructure support. Support for Institutional Review Board and Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee functions, research support, statistical support, grant writing assistance, funds for
research related to maintaining accredited, training programs, and other funds associated with
maintaining research in the CIP.

Multi-Service Markets. The DoD’s approach to coordinating care in military markets served by
more than one Military Department. Enhanced Multi-Service Markets are Multi-Service

Change 1,                                        14
11/30/2017                                                                             GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 6000.08, January 22, 2014


Markets identified by Reference (i). These markets are provided with “enhanced” authorities
that include the authority to manage the allocation of the budget for the market, direct the
adoption of common clinical and business functions for the market, optimize readiness to deploy
medically ready forces and ready medical forces, and direct the movement of workload and
workforce between or among the medical treatment facilities. These authorities are effective
October 1, 2013.

nonprofit entity. A corporation, fund, or foundation exempt from federal income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of Title 26, U.S.C. (Reference (w)).

O&M funds. DHP funding that supports the delivery of health care in the military treatment
facilities and private sector and associated operating activities, education, base operating support,
and management oversight, including infrastructure management of CIs. O&M funds are
available for obligation for the period of one fiscal year.

research. Any systematic study directed toward fuller scientific knowledge or understanding of
military healthcare and in support of health readiness solutions that protect, treat, and optimize
the health and performance of the total force as envisioned Reference (d) or in other analysis or
guidance that may be established by the DoD’s leadership in these fields of study.

research funds. Funding that supports the DHP RDT&E portfolio at both intramural and
extramural medical research activities. The DHP RDT&E appropriation also funds research
programs for medical information management/information technology, medical research to
reduce capability gaps, support to medical laboratory facilities inside and outside the continental
United States, and the Armed Forces Radiological Research Institute. Funds are available for
obligation for the period of 2 fiscal years.




Change 1,                                        15
11/30/2017                                                                             GLOSSARY
