                               Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 1342.29
                                                                                January 31, 2017

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Interstate Compact on Educational Opportunity for Military Children

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the sense of Congress as set forth in section 539 of Public
Law 111-84 (Reference (a)), the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02 (Reference (b)),
and the guidance in DoDD 5400.11 (Reference (c)), DoD 5400.11-R (Reference (d)), and DoD
5500.07-R (Reference (e)), this instruction establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and
provides procedures to implement the Interstate Compact on Educational Opportunity for
Military Children (referred to in this instruction as the “Compact”) within the DoD.


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD.


3. POLICY. In accordance with References (a) and (e), it is DoD policy to support the intent of
the Compact by reducing the difficulty children of military families (referred to in this
instruction as “children” or “the child”) have in transferring between school systems because of
frequent moves and deployment of their parents. The DoD will support the Compact by:

   a. Designating military liaisons, by position, to State Councils of member States, the DoD
Education Activity (DoDEA) Committee, and the Military Interstate Children’s Compact
Commission (MIC3).

   b. Implementing the intent of the Compact in the DoDEA to ensure:

       (1) Timely enrollment of children in school so they are not penalized due to:

             (a) Late or delayed transfers of education records from the previous school
district(s); or

           (b) Differences in entrance or age requirements.
                                                                 DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


       (2) Placement of children in educational courses and programs, including special
educational services, so they are not penalized due to differences in attendance requirements,
scheduling, sequencing, grading, or course content.

        (3) Flexible qualification and eligibility of children so they can have an equitable chance
at participation in extracurricular, academic, athletic, and social activities.

       (4) Graduation within the same timeframe as the children’s peers.

   c. Promoting through DoDEA and the Military Departments:

       (1) Flexibility and cooperation among state education agencies (SEAs) or local education
agencies (LEAs), DoDEA, Military Departments, parents, and children to achieve educational
success.

       (2) Coordination among the various State agencies, LEAs, and military installations
regarding the State’s participation in the Compact.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. The DoD implements policy in this instruction by:

  a. Establishing a committee within DoDEA (referred to in this instruction as the “DoDEA
Committee”).

    b. Designating military representatives by position to serve as liaisons to the State Councils
of the member States and the DoDEA Committee in accordance with procedures in Enclosure 3.

   c. Designating the ex-officio member to serve as a liaison to MIC3 in accordance with
Enclosures 2 and 3.

   d. Ensuring DoDEA compliance with the selected provisions of the Compact described in
Enclosure 4.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.




                                                 2
                                                            DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective January 31, 2017.




                                             Peter Levine
                                             Performing the Duties of the Under Secretary of
                                             Defense for Personnel and Readiness

Enclosures:
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Representatives to State Councils, the DoDEA Committee, and MIC3
   4. Compact Provisions
Glossary




                                            3
                                                                                            DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................5

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................6

     ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE
        AFFAIRS (ASD(M&RA)) ..................................................................................................6
     DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MILITARY COMMUNITY
        AND FAMILY POLICY (DASD(MC&FP)) ......................................................................6
     DIRECTOR, DoDEA ................................................................................................................6
     SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS........................................................7

ENCLOSURE 3: REPRESENTATIVES TO STATE COUNCILS, THE DoDEA
  COMMITTEE, AND MIC3.......................................................................................................8

     MILITARY REPRESENTATIVES AS LIAISONS TO STATE COUNCILS ........................8
     NOMINATION PROCESS FOR POSITIONS DESIGNATED AS LIAISONS TO
        STATE COUNCILS ............................................................................................................9
     MILITARY REPRESENTATIVE TO THE DoDEA COMMITTEE.................................... 10
     EX-OFFICIO MEMBER SERVING AS A LIAISON TO MIC3 .......................................... 10

ENCLOSURE 4: COMPACT PROVISIONS ..............................................................................12

     DoDEA AREA SCHOOL DISTRICTS RELATIONSHIP WITH SEAs OR LEAs IN
       MEMBER STATES...........................................................................................................12
     ARTICLES IV THROUGH VII OF THE COMPACT ...........................................................12
       Article IV: Education Records and Enrollment ................................................................12
       Article V: Placement and Attendance ...............................................................................13
       Article VI: Eligibility for Enrollment ...............................................................................15
       Article VII: Graduation .....................................................................................................15

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................17

     PART I: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................17
     PART II: DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................17

TABLES

     1. Process for Designating Liaison Positions to State Councils ...............................................9
     2. Military Department Areas of Authority for Selecting a Single Military Representative
        to Serve as a Liaison to the State Council..........................................................................10




                                                                     4
                                                              DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a) Section 539 of Public Law 111-84, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
    2010,” October 28, 2009
(b) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c) DoD Directive 5400.11, “DoD Privacy Program,” May 8, 2007, as amended
(d) DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(e) DoD 5500.07-R, “Joint Ethics Regulation (JER),” August 1, 1993, as amended
(f) Title 10, United States Code
(g) Title 20, United States Code
(h) DoD Directive 1342.20, “Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA),”
    October 19, 2007
(i) DoD Instruction 1342.15, “Educational Advisory Committees and Councils,” December 7,
    2012
(j) DoD Instruction 1342.25, “School Boards for Department of Defense Domestic Dependent
    Elementary and Secondary Schools (DDESS),” October 30, 1996
(k) Title 5, United States Code
(l) Executive Order 13160, “Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Race, Sex, Color, National
    Origin, Disability, Religion, Age, Sexual Orientation, and Status as a Parent in Federally
    Conducted Education and Training Programs,” June 23, 2000
(m) Title 29, United States Code




                                              5                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
(ASD(M&RA)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), the ASD(M&RA) oversees the implementation of
this instruction.


2. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MILITARY COMMUNITY
AND FAMILY POLICY (DASD(MC&FP)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the
ASD(M&RA), the DASD(MC&FP):

    a. Designates military representatives by position as liaisons to State councils, nominated by
the Secretaries of the Military Departments by the procedures outlined in Enclosure 3 of this
instruction.

     b. Designates the DoD ex-officio member serving as a liaison to MIC3, insofar as the DoD
is invited to do so by MIC3.

    c. Maintains a roster of designated liaisons to State councils in accordance with References
(c) and (d).

    d. Monitors issues arising under the Compact (1) affecting children of military families
attending and transferring between member State schools, and (2) the implementation of
Enclosure 4 of this instruction, affecting children of military families transferring between
member state schools and DoDEA’s schools (consisting of the DoD Dependents Schools
(DoDDS) – Europe, DoDDS – Pacific, and the Domestic Dependent Elementary and Secondary
Schools (DDESS)).


3. DIRECTOR, DoDEA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the ASD(M&RA), the
Director, DoDEA:

    a. To the extent allowable by section 2164 of Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.)
(Reference (f)), and sections 921-932 of Title 20, U.S.C. (Reference (g)), adjusts operating
policies and procedures issued pursuant to DoDD 1342.20 (Reference (h)) to implement the
provisions of the Compact described in Enclosure 4 of this instruction.

   b. Informs boards and councils, described in DoDI 1342.15 (Reference (i)) and DoDI
1342.25 (Reference (j)), of the Compact provisions in Enclosure 4 of this instruction and the
DoDEA administration of these provisions.




                                                6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


    c. Addresses disputes over provisions in Enclosure 4 of this instruction between member
States and DoDEA. When differences cannot be resolved with a member State, works with
MIC3 to resolve these disputes.

    d. Establishes the DoDEA Committee to review compliance with the provisions in Enclosure
4 of this instruction and to address issues raised by the Secretaries of the Military Departments
concerning the implementation of these provisions.

   e. Ensures all personally identifiable information is collected, maintained, disseminated, and
used in accordance with References (c) and (d).

    f. Ensures that DoDEA schools comply with Enclosure 4 and that DoDEA school-level
officials inform DoDEA students transferring to schools in member States of the benefits
extended by receiving States und the Compact.


4. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

    a. Nominate military representatives by position, in accordance with the procedures outlined
in Enclosure 3 of this instruction, for designation as liaisons to State Councils by the
DASD(MC&FP) when such DoD liaison is requested.

   b. Establish departmental policies and procedures to inform military communities of:

        (1) The provisions of this instruction as it affects children of military families attending
and transferring between member State schools; and

      (2) The provisions in Enclosure 4 of this instruction concerning students transferring
between DoDEA and member State schools.

   c. Procedures to resolve issues or challenges raised by parents concerning the provisions of
Enclosure 4 of this instruction.




                                                  7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

  REPRESENTATIVES TO STATE COUNCILS, THE DoDEA COMMITTEE, AND MIC3


1. MILITARY REPRESENTATIVES AS LIAISONS TO STATE COUNCILS. In accordance
with section 3-201 of Reference (e), incumbents of positions designated as liaisons to State
Councils will:

    a. Be a military member or a civilian employee of DoD who has a direct interface with the
State education system as part of official duties or has supervisory responsibility for those who
do.

   b. Only represent DoD interests (not the interests of the State Council), and consequently
may not:

      (1) Engage in management or control of the State Council (therefore, may not vote or
make decisions on daily administration of council).

        (2) Endorse or allow the appearance of DoD endorsement of the State Council or its
events, products, services, or enterprises.

       (3) Represent the State Council to third parties; or

       (4) Represent the State Council to the U.S. Government, as prohibited by federal
criminal statutes.

   c. Make clear to the State Council that:

     (1) The opinions expressed by the representative do not bind DoD or any DoD
Component to any action.

        (2) If included on State Council websites, all references to the representative by name or
title must indicate that they are the “Military Representative” as opposed to a council member.

    d. Notify the chain of command of issues requiring policy decisions or actions requested of
the military community within the State.

   e. When called upon to act as the spokesperson for one or more than one installation:

       (1) Get feedback from the designated points of contact at each military installation
within his or her responsibility.

        (2) Coordinate proposed input to the State Council with the appropriate points of contact
for each military installation within his or her responsibility.




                                                 8                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


        (3) Act as a conduit for information between the State Council and each military
installation within his or her responsibility.

        (4) Provide feedback through the chain of command to the points of contact for each
military installation within his or her responsibility and, as appropriate, to the Office of the
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs (OASA(M&RA)), the Office
of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Manpower and Reserve Affairs (OASN(M&RA)), or
the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
(OASAF(M&RA)).


2. NOMINATION PROCESS FOR POSITIONS DESIGNATED AS LIAISONS TO STATE
COUNCILS

   a. In accordance with Reference (e), liaison positions are nominated by the Military
Departments and designated by the DASD(MC&FP), not by State officials. Depending on the
number of liaison positions required by State policy, designating liaison positions to a State
Council will be accomplished according to the processes outlined in Table 1:

              Table 1. Process for Designating Liaison Positions to State Councils

   If State statute         The State               Who requests a           Whereupon the
   concerning military      Commissioner            selection be made        official written
   representatives          contacts:               by:                      designation is made
   provides for:                                                             by:
   One representative       DASD(MC&FP)             OASA(M&RA),              DASD(MC&FP)
   for all military                                 OASN(M&RA), or
   children in the State.                           OASAF(M&RA)
                                                    responsible for
                                                    providing a
                                                    representative for the
                                                    State listed in Table
                                                    2
   One representative       DASD(MC&FP)             OASA(M&RA),              DASD(MC&FP)
   for each Military                                OASN(M&RA), and
   Service.                                         OASAF(M&RA)
   One representative       DASD(MC&FP)             OASA(M&RA),              DASD(MC&FP)
   for each military                                OASN(M&RA) and
   installation in the                              OASAF(M&RA)
   State.


    b. When there is more than one military representative to a State Council (e.g., one per
installation or one per Military Department represented in the State), the incumbent of the
position nominated by the responsible Military Department (Table 2) will serve as the lead
military representative when DoD must speak with a single voice.


                                                9                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


    c. In circumstances where the State requests an individual by name, the DASD(MC&FP)
will forward the request to the individual’s Military Department for consideration of designating
the position which the individual encumbers. If that Military Department is different from the
one designated in Table 2, the DASD(MC&FP) will first obtain the concurrence of the
responsible Military Department.

    d. In accordance with the Compact, State officials appoint or designate the Military Family
Education Liaison for the State. Service members and DoD civilians cannot be appointed or
designated to fill this position for the State.


Table 2. Military Department Areas of Authority for Selecting a Single Military Representative
                      Position to Serve as a Liaison to the State Council

MILITARY           AREAS OF AUTHORITY
DEPARTMENT
Army               Alabama, Alaska, Colorado, Georgia, Hawaii, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
                   Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New York,
                   Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas, Vermont, Washington,
                   West Virginia, Wisconsin
Navy               American Samoa, California, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Florida,
                   Guam, Maine, Mississippi, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Northern
                   Marianas, Oregon, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Virginia, Virgin
                   Islands
Air Force          Arizona, Arkansas, Delaware, Idaho, Illinois, Massachusetts, Montana,
                   Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, South
                   Dakota, Utah, Wyoming


3. MILITARY REPRESENTATIVE TO THE DoDEA COMMITTEE. Membership of the
DoDEA Committee will include a representative from one of the Military Services to represent
all four Services. OASA(M&RA), OASN(M&RA), or OASAF(M&RA) will nominate a
representative on a rotational basis who will be designated for a 2-year term by the
DASD(MC&FP).


4. EX-OFFICIO MEMBER SERVING AS A LIAISON TO MIC3. In accordance with section
3-201 of Reference (e), the DoD ex-officio member to the Commission must:

    a. Be a military member or a civilian employee of the DoD who can remain in the position
for at least 2 years and who has a direct interface with DoDEA and the U.S. public education
system as part of official duties or has supervisory responsibility for those who do.

   b. Attend as a liaison meetings of MIC3, its Executive Committee, and other standing
committees where requested by the Commission.




                                               10                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


   c. Only represent DoD interests (not the interests of MIC3), and consequently may not:

       (1) Engage in management or control of MIC3 (therefore, may not vote or make
decisions on daily administration of MIC3).

       (2) Endorse or allow the appearance of DoD endorsement of MIC3, or its events,
products, services, or enterprises.

       (3) Represent the Commission to third parties; or

       (4) Represent MIC3 to the U.S. Government, as prohibited by criminal statutes.

   d. Make clear to MIC3 that:

        (1) The opinions expressed by the incumbent do not bind DoD or any DoD Component
to any action.

        (2) If included on MIC3 websites, all references to the incumbent by name or title must
indicate that they are the “DoD Ex-Officio Member” as opposed to a MIC3 member.

    e. Notify the chain of command of issues requiring policy decisions or actions requested of
the DoD.




                                               11                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


                                         ENCLOSURE 4

                                   COMPACT PROVISIONS


1. DoDEA AREA SCHOOL DISTRICTS RELATIONSHIP WITH SEAs OR LEAs IN
MEMBER STATES

    a. For the purposes of DoD’s implementation of the Compact in the schools it operates,
DoDEA’s area offices (DoDDS – Europe, DoDDS – Pacific, and the DDESS) and their schools
are considered as the equivalent of LEAs and SEAs, respectively.

    b. Each DoDEA area acts as the “receiving LEA” and “sending LEA” in working with LEAs
or SEAs in member States.


2. ARTICLES IV THROUGH VII OF THE COMPACT. This Enclosure describes the specific
duties that DoDEA’s LEAs have as “sending” or “receiving” LEAs. DoDEA’s duties under this
Enclosure will reciprocate the duties assumed by member State LEAs or SEAs to children of
military families, as expressed by their respective State’s implementation of the Compact
Articles IV through VII. DoDEA will implement the provisions described below, which, while
retaining the intent of the Compact, have been modified as needed in the DoDEA context.

   a. Article IV: Education Records and Enrollment

       (1) Unofficial or “Hand-Carried” Education Records

            (a) If official education records cannot be released to the parents for transfer, the
DoDEA custodian of the records, as the sending LEA, shall provide to the parent a complete set
of unofficial education records.

            (b) Upon receipt of the unofficial education records, the DoDEA school, as the
school in the receiving LEA, shall enroll and appropriately place the child as quickly as possible
based on the information in the unofficial records, pending validation by the official records.

       (2) Official Education Records or Transcripts

           (a) The DoDEA school, acting as the receiving LEA, shall request the child’s official
education record from the school in the sending State at the same time as the DoDEA school
enrolls and conditionally places the child.

            (b) Upon receipt of the request for a child’s records, the school in DoDEA, acting as
the sending LEA, will provide the child’s official education records to the school in the receiving
State, within 10 work days. If there is a designated school staff break, records will be provided
as soon as possible; however, the time will not exceed 10 work days after the return of staff.




                                                12                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                   DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


DoDEA will initiate actions to meet these deadlines without violating the disclosure rules of
section 552a of Title 5, U.S.C. (Reference (k)).

       (3) Immunizations

            (a) Parents have 30 days from the date of enrolling their child in a DoDEA school to
have their child(ren) immunized in accordance with DoDEA’s immunization requirements, as
the receiving LEA.

           (b) For a series of immunizations, parents must begin initial vaccinations of their
child(ren) within 30 days.

       (4) Entrance Age

            (a) At the time of transition and regardless of the age of the child, the DoDEA
school, acting as the receiving LEA, shall enroll the transitioning child at the grade level as the
child’s grade level (i.e. in kindergarten through grade 12) in the sending state’s LEA .

            (b) A child who has satisfactorily completed the prerequisite grade level in the
sending state’s LEA will be eligible for enrollment in the next higher grade level in DoDEA
school, acting as the receiving LEA, regardless of the child’s age.

            (c) To be admitted to a school in the receiving State, the parent or guardian of a child
transferring from a DoDEA (sending) LEA must provide:

               1. Official military orders showing the military member or the member’s spouse
was assigned to the sending State or commuting area of the State in which the child was
previously enrolled. If the child was residing with a guardian other than the military member
during the previous enrollment, or proof of guardianship (as specified in the Compact) should be
provided by the parent or guardian to the receiving LEA or SEA to establish eligibility under the
Compact.

               2. An official letter or transcript from the sending school authority that shows the
student’s record of attendance, academic information, and grade placement.

               3. Evidence of immunization against communicable diseases.

               4. Evidence of date of birth.

   b. Article V: Placement And Attendance

       (1) Course Placement

          (a) As long as the course is offered by DoDEA, as the receiving LEA, it shall honor
placement of a transfer student in courses based on the child’s placement or educational
assessment in the sending State school.



                                                 13                                 ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


          (b) Course placement includes, but is not limited to, Honors, International
Baccalaureate, Advanced Placement, vocational, technical, and career pathways courses.

           (c) Continuing the child’s academic program from the previous school and
promoting placement in academically and career challenging courses shall be a primary
consideration when DoDEA considers the placement of a transferring child.

           (d) DoDEA, acting as the receiving LEA, may perform subsequent evaluations to
ensure the child’s appropriate course placement.

       (2) Educational Program Placement

            (a) As long as the program is offered by DoDEA, acting as the receiving LEA, it will
honor placement of the child in educational programs based on current educational assessments
and placement in like programs in the sending State. Such programs include, but are not limited
to, gifted and talented programs and English language learners.

           (b) The receiving State school may perform subsequent evaluations to ensure the
child’s appropriate educational program placement.

       (3) Special Education Services

            (a) DoDEA, acting as the receiving LEA, will initially provide comparable services
to a child with disabilities based on his or her current individualized education program (IEP) in
compliance with chapter 33 of Reference (g), also known and referred to in this instruction as the
“Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA),” as amended, and the requirements of
Executive Order 13160 (Reference (l)). DoDEA may perform subsequent evaluations to ensure
the child’s appropriate placement consistent with IDEA.

            (b) DoDEA, acting as the receiving LEA, will make reasonable accommodations and
modifications to address the needs of incoming children with disabilities, in compliance with the
requirements of section 794 of Title 29, U.S.C. (Reference (m)) and Reference (l), and subject to
an existing 504 plan to provide the child with equal access to education.

       (4) Placement Flexibility. DoDEA’s administrative officials must have flexibility in
waiving course or program prerequisites or other preconditions for placement in courses or
programs offered under the jurisdiction of DoDEA.

        (5) Absences Related to Deployment Activities. A child whose parent or legal guardian
is an active duty Service member and has been called to duty for, is on leave from, or has
immediately returned from deployment to a combat zone or combat support posting, will be
granted additional excused absences under governing DoDEA rules.

   c. Article VI: Eligibility for Enrollment




                                               14                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                    DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


        (1) Eligibility in DoDEA Schools. Eligibility of dependents of military members is
governed by the laws in References (f) and (g) and their implementing regulations. Only
children who are eligible to attend DoDEA schools may do so, regardless of their transition
status.

        (2) Eligibility for Extracurricular Participation. DoDEA, acting as the receiving LEA,
will facilitate the opportunity for transitioning children’s inclusion in extracurricular activities,
regardless of application deadlines, to the extent the children are otherwise qualified.

    d. Article VII: Graduation. To facilitate the child’s on-time graduation, DoDEA will
incorporate the following procedures:

         (1) Waiver Requirements

           (a) DoDEA administrative officials will waive specific courses required for
graduation if similar course work has been satisfactorily completed in another LEA or provide
reasonable justification for denial.

            (b) If DoDEA, as a receiving LEA, does not grant a waiver to a child who would
qualify to graduate from the sending school, DoDEA will provide an alternative means of
acquiring required coursework so that graduation may occur on time.

          (c) If DoDEA, as the receiving LEA, requires a graduation project, volunteer
community service hours, or other DoDEA specific requirement, DoDEA may waive those
requirements.

         (2) Exit Exams

            (a) DoDEA, as a receiving LEA, must:

                1. Accept exit or end-of-course exams required for graduation from the sending
State.

                2. Accept national norm-referenced achievement tests.

              3. Provide alternative testing in lieu of testing requirements for graduation in the
receiving from a DoDEA school.

           (b) If the alternatives in paragraph 2b(1) of this enclosure cannot be accommodated
by DoDEA as the receiving LEA for a child transferring in his or her senior year, then the
provisions of paragraph 2a(4)(c) of this enclosure will apply.

         (3) Transfers During Senior Year

           (a) If a child transferring at the beginning or during his or her senior year is ineligible
to graduate from DoDEA, as the receiving LEA, after all alternatives have been considered,



                                                  15                                  ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                  DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


DoDEA will request a diploma from the sending LEA or SEA. DoDEA will ensure the receipt
of a diploma from the sending LEA or SEA, if the child meets the graduation requirements of the
sending LEA or SEA.

            (b) If one of the States in question is not a member of this Compact, DoDEA, as a
receiving state, will use best efforts to facilitate a transferring child’s on-time graduation in
accordance with paragraphs 2a(4)(a) and 2a(4)(b) of this Enclosure.




                                                 16                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                  DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(M&RA)           Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs

DASD(MC&FP)         Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Community and
                    Family Policy

DDESS               Domestic Dependent Elementary and Secondary Schools
DoDD                Department of Defense Directive
DoDDS               DoD Dependents Schools
DoDEA               Department of Defense Education Activity
DoDI                Department of Defense Instruction

IDEA                Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
IEP                 individualized education program

LEA                 local education agency

MIC3                Military Interstate Children’s Compact Commission

OASAF(M&RA) Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Manpower and
            Reserve Affairs
OASA(M&RA)  Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve
            Affairs
OASN(M&RA)  Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Manpower and Reserve
            Affairs

SEA                 State education agency

U.S.C.              United States Code
USD(P&R)            Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

504 plan. A plan required pursuant to Reference (m) specifying the modifications and
accommodations for a child with a disability to meet the individual educational needs of that
child as adequately as the needs of children without disabilities are met. The plans can include
accommodations such as wheelchair ramps, blood sugar monitoring, an extra set of textbooks, a
peanut-free lunch environment, home instruction, or a tape recorder or keyboard for taking notes.




                                                 17                                 GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


children of military families. School-aged children who are enrolled in kindergarten through
twelfth grade and are in the households of Service members who:

   Are on active duty, including members of the National Guard and Reserve on active duty
orders pursuant to section 1211 of Reference (f).

   Are active duty or veterans who are severely wounded, ill, or injured; or

   Die on active duty or as a result of injuries sustained on active duty.

    Children of military members who are severely wounded, ill, or injured retain this
designation for 1 year after discharge or retirement. Children of military members who die on
active duty or as a result of injuries sustained on active duty, retain this designation for 1 year
after death.

deployment. The period 1 month prior to the military members’ departure from their home
station on military orders through 6 months after return to their home station.

DoDEA Committee. A DoD committee established pursuant to this instruction by the Director,
DoDEA to advise DoDEA on compliance with the provisions in Enclosure 4 by DoDEA schools.
The DoDEA Committee also provides input to the ex-officio member of the Commission on
issues arising from DoDEA school interactions with member States of the Compact, and acts as a
counterpart to State Councils of member States.

education records. Those official records, files, and data directly related to a child and
maintained by the school or LEA or SEA, including but not limited to, records encompassing all
the material kept in the child’s cumulative folder such as general identifying data, records of
attendance and of academic work completed, records of achievement and results of evaluative
tests, health data, disciplinary status, test protocols, and IEPs.

ex-officio member of the Commission. Non-voting member of the Commission who may
include, but not be limited to, members of the representative organizations of military family
advocates, LEA officials, parent and teacher groups, the DoD, the Education Commission of the
State, the Interstate Agreement on the Qualification of Educational Personnel, and other
interstate compacts affecting the education of children of military members.

extracurricular activity. A voluntary activity sponsored by the school or LEA or SEA or an
organization sanctioned by the LEA or SEA. Extracurricular activities include, but are not
limited to, preparation for and involvement in public performances, contests, athletic
competitions, demonstrations, displays, and club activities.

IEP. When a child is identified as a child with disabilities in accordance with the IDEA, he or
she must have a written document that describes the special education supports and services the
child will receive. The IEP is developed by a team that includes the child’s parents and school
staff.




                                                 18                                     GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


Interstate Compact on Education Opportunity for Military Children (the Compact). An
agreement approved through State legislation that requires member States to follow provisions
supporting the transition of children of military families between school systems in member
States. As part of joining the Compact, States agree to participate in the Commission and pay
dues to the Commission to support its oversight of the Compact.

LEA. A public authority legally constituted by the State as an administrative agency to provide
control of and direction for kindergarten through twelfth grade public educational institutions.
For the purpose of administering the provisions of the Compact in Enclosure 4 of this instruction,
DoDEA school districts as defined in Reference (g) are equivalent to an LEA.

member State. A State that has enacted the Compact.

MIC3. The Military Interstate Children’s Compact Commission, also known as the Interstate
Commission on Educational Opportunity for Military Children (sometimes referred to as the
“Interstate Commission” or “the Commission”), is the governing body of the Compact composed
of representatives from each member State, as well as various ex-officio members. The
Commission provides general oversight of the agreement, creates and enforces rules governing
the Compact, and promotes training and compliance with the Compact. Each member State will
be allowed one vote on Compact matters, and the Commission will provide the venue for solving
interstate issues and disputes.

Military Family Education Liaison. Individual appointed or designated by the State Council of
each member state to assist military families and the State in facilitating the implementation of
the Compact. Military members and DoD civilian employees cannot perform this function.

military installation. A base, camp, post, station, yard, center, homeport facility for any ship, or
other activity under DoD jurisdiction, including any leased facility. This term does not include
any facility used primarily for civil works, rivers and harbors projects, or flood control projects.

military representative as a liaison to a State Council. Incumbent of a position designated by the
DASD(MC&FP), who performs the duties and responsibilities defined in Enclosure 2 of this
Instruction. The military representative is responsible for representing the interest of the DoD in
fostering easier transition of children of military families according to their designation
(installation representative, Military Department representative or statewide representative). The
military representative will be a military member or DoD civilian who can remain in the position
for at least 2 years and whose position has a direct interface with the State education system as
part of official duties or has supervisory responsibility for those who do.

military representative to the DoDEA Committee. Indvidual nominated to represent all four
Services by the OASA(M&RA), OASN(M&RA), or OASAF(M&RA) on a rotational basis and
appointed by the DASD(MC&FP) for a 2-year term. Because DoDEA is a DoD Component the
military representative may act as a full participant in the DoDEA Committee.

receiving State. The State to which a child of a military family is sent, brought, or caused to be
sent or brought.



                                                 19                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 1342.29, January 31, 2017


SEA. A public authority similar to an LEA, legally constituted by the State as an administrative
agency to provide control of and direction for kindergarten through twelfth grade public
educational institutions for the entire State.

sending State. The State from which a child of a military family is sent, brought, or caused to be
sent or brought.

State. State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Marianas Islands and any other
U.S. territory or possession. For purposes of administering the provisions of the Compact in
Enclosure 4 of this Instruction, the DoD is considered a State and DoDEA is considered the
equivalent of a State department of education for the DoD.

State Council. A body that coordinates among government agencies, LEAs, and military
installations concerning the member State’s participation in and compliance with the Compact
and the Commission activities. A member State may determine the membership of its own
Council, but membership must include at least: the State superintendent of education;
superintendent of a school district with a high concentration of military children; representative
(as a liaison) from a military installation; one representative each from the legislative and
executive branches of State government; and other offices and stakeholder groups the State
Council deems appropriate.

transition.

    The formal and physical process of transferring from school to school; or

    The period of time in which a child moves from a school in the sending State to a school in
the receiving State.

veteran. A person who served in the military and who was discharged or released from the
military under conditions other than dishonorable.




                                                20                                    GLOSSARY
