                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                               NUMBER 6010.24
                                                                                  May 14, 2015

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Interagency Complex Care Coordination

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction:

    a. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for complex care coordination in
accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5124.02 (Reference (a)) and the Memorandum
of Understanding between the Department of Veterans Affairs and DoD (Reference (b)).

   b. Provides a common operational model and supporting responsibilities concerning
complex care coordination processes to which the Department of Veterans Affairs and DoD
have, in Reference (b), agreed to adhere.


2. APPLICABILITY

     a. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the Coast Guard at
all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security by agreement
with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff,
the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the
DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD Components”).

   b. Reference (b) and this instruction are not intended to and do not bestow or confer rights or
benefits provided for under the respective statutory authorities of the Department of Veterans
Affairs or DoD.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. A common operational model and processes will be followed in support of the
Department of Veterans Affairs and DoD complex care coordination processes. Development or
modification of internal policies for governance and execution of these processes must comply
with Reference (b).
                                                                    DoDI 6010.24, May 14, 2015


    b. Leadership will fully support implementation of Reference (b) and will work to
implement common communication strategies, policy synchronization, and joint monitoring of
clinical, non-clinical, and administrative outcome performance metrics.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA)). Under the authority,
direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)), the ASD(HA) monitors DoD compliance with this instruction and supports the
guidance of users through the Interagency Care Coordination Committee, a subcommittee of the
Joint Executive Committee.

   b. Director, Defense Health Agency. Under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), through the ASD(HA), and in addition to the responsibilities in paragraph 4c, the
Director, Defense Health Agency is authorized to establish clinical case management guidance
and procedures to implement this instruction.

   c. DoD Component Heads. The DoD Component heads use Reference (b) to develop policy
and guidance for their Component in provision or coordination of care, benefits, and services for
Service members or veterans requiring complex care coordination as defined in Reference (b).


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


6. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective May 14, 2015.




                                                Acting Under Secretary of Defense for
                                                Personnel and Readiness

Enclosure
   References




                                                2
                                                              DoDI 6010.24, May 14, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE

                                        REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b) Memorandum of Understanding between Department of Veterans Affairs and Department
    of Defense for Interagency Complex Care Coordination Requirements for Service Members
    and Veterans, July 29, 2014 1




1
    MOU can be found on http://www.health.mil/Policies


                                               3                           ENCLOSURE
