                              Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 5030.56
                                                                                    July 17, 2012
                                                 Incorporating Change 1, Effective April 15, 2020

                                                                                         USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      DoD Consumer Affairs Program

References: (a) DoD Directive 5030.56, “DoD Consumer Affairs Program,” August 12, 1982
                (hereby cancelled)
            (b) Executive Order 12160, “Providing for Enhancement and Coordination of
                Federal Consumer Programs,” September 26, 1979, as amended


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction reissues Reference (a) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities for the implementation of the DoD Consumer Affairs Program in accordance
with Reference (b).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITION. For the purposes of this Instruction, the term “consumer” means any
individual who uses, purchases, acquires, attempts to purchase or acquire, or is offered or
furnished any real or personal property, tangible or intangible goods, services, or credit for
personal, family, or household purposes.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that the needs and interests of consumers shall be considered and
addressed in the formulation of DoD policies. Consumer programs shall include, as a minimum,
five elements:

   a. Consumer affairs perspective in the development and review of policies and programs.

   b. Consumer participation in the development and review of policies and programs.

   c. Informational materials about DoD responsibilities, services, and procedures.
                                                                     DoDI 5030.56, July 17, 2012



   d. Education and training about programs for carrying out Federal consumer policy.

   e. Procedures for logging in, investigating, and responding to consumer complaints.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness and Force Management. The Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Readiness and Force Management, under the authority, direction, and
control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall serve as the
Consumer Affairs Advisor to the Secretary of Defense. In discharging this responsibility, he or
she shall:

       (1) Coordinate consumer affairs issues arising within the OSD and DoD Components.

       (2) Participate in the development and review of DoD policies, programs, legislation,
and rules on consumer-related issues.

        (3) Serve as the Secretary of Defense’s representative on the Consumer Affairs Council
established in accordance with Reference (b).

   b. Heads of the DoD Components. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

       (1) Develop consumer affairs programs consistent with this Instruction.

       (2) Address consumer concerns related to their activities.

         (3) Designate one person, on either a part-time or full-time basis, to serve as consumer
affairs representative and to handle consumer inquiries and complaints on programs with
significant consumer involvement or impact.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance updates references and removes
expiration language in accordance with current Chief Management Officer of the Department of
Defense direction.




Change 1, 04/15/2020                             2
                                                                  DoDI 5030.56, July 17, 2012


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective July 17, 2012.




                                             Erin C. Conaton
                                             Under Secretary of Defense for
                                             Personnel and Readiness




Change 1, 04/15/2020                        3
