                              Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION
                                                                              NUMBER 3025.20
                                                                                     April 6, 2012
                                                             Incorporating Change 1, May 24, 2017

                                                                                              USD(P)

SUBJECT:      Defense Support of Special Events

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Establishes DoD policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for support of
civil authorities and qualifying entities during the conduct of special events in accordance with
the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5111.1 (Reference (a)) and the Deputy Secretary of
Defense Memorandum (Reference (b)). This support will be referred to as “support of special
events.”

    b. Implements provisions of References (a) through (j) addressing matters pertaining to
Defense Support of Civil Authorities (DSCA) for special events, including support for qualifying
entities.

   c. Supersedes and cancels DoDD 2000.15 (Reference (k)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, National
Guard personnel providing support of special events in title 32 of United States Code (Reference
(g)) status, and all other organizational entities in DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”).

    b. Does not apply to installation commanders or Heads of DoD Components providing
localized support to a special event solely under the auspices of community relations, public
outreach, or recruitment efforts pursuant to DoDD 5410.18 and DoD Instruction 5410.19
(References (l) and (m)) or other similar authority.
                                                                      DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012



3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.

4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. DoD capabilities may be used to provide support for international and domestic special
events as authorized by law and DoD policy. DoD resources in support of special events may be
provided only after the resources of all other relevant governmental and non-governmental
entities are determined not to be available, unless there is a statutory exception or the DoD is the
only source of specialized capabilities. DoD support should not be provided if use of
commercial enterprises would be more appropriate.

   b. DoD Components shall provide support to civil authorities or qualifying entities for
special events only as authorized in this Instruction.

    c. The DoD may support such events with personnel, equipment, and services in accordance
with applicable laws, regulations, and interagency agreements. Most support shall be provided
on a non-interference basis, with careful consideration given to effects on readiness and current
operations. Support for National Special Security Events (NSSEs) shall be in accordance with
National Security Presidential Directive-46/Homeland Security Presidential Directive-15, Annex
II (Reference (n)).

    d. DoD security and safety-related support for an event shall have priority over logistics
assistance. However, logistics assistance may be provided if deemed appropriate and necessary,
consistent with applicable statutes and policy guidance.

   e. Funding for special events is subject to the following:

        (1) The DoD may receive separate funding or authority to provide support to specific
special events.

       (2) Support of special events for which the DoD does not receive appropriations or for
which DoD funds are not available for such support must be approved by the Secretary of
Defense and must be provided on a reimbursable basis in accordance with Reference (c),
Reference (f), or other applicable statutes.

       (3) Reimbursement for DoD support provided to civilian law enforcement agencies
during special events is required, in accordance with section 377 of Reference (c), unless the
Secretary of Defense elects to waive reimbursement after determining that the support:

           (a) Is provided in the normal course of military training or operations; or

           (b) Results in a benefit to the personnel providing the support that is substantially
equivalent to that which would otherwise be obtained from military operations or training.




Change 1, 05/24/2017                             2
                                                                        DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

       (4) The DoD will provide support to NSSEs in accordance with Reference (n), as
authorized by law and policy.

        (5) Security and safety of special events are responsibilities shared by Federal, State, and
local authorities. If Federal funds will be provided to State or local authorities to offset the costs
of enhanced security and public safety for special events and if State or local officials request the
employment of National Guard personnel in a Federal pay status, States shall be encouraged to
use those funds to employ those National Guard personnel in a State pay status or to reimburse
the DoD for costs related to the employment of the National Guard personnel in a Federal pay
status.

   f. DoD support of special events that includes support to civilian law enforcement officials
must comply with DoDI 3025.21 (Reference (o)).

   g. DoD support of special events that includes support to civilian intelligence officials must
comply with DoD 5240.1-R (Reference (p)).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The annual report to Congress described in paragraph
2.1. of Enclosure 2 of this Instruction is a congressional information collection reported directly
to Congress in coordination with the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative
Affairs.


8. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


9. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.

10. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective April 6, 2012.




                                                   James N. Miller
                                                   Acting Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
Enclosures
   1. References



Change 1, 05/24/2017                              3
                             DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 1, 05/24/2017     4
                                                                             DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

                                             ENCLOSURE 1

                                              REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),”
      December 8, 1999
(b)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,”
      November 30, 2006
(c)   Sections 372-374, 377, 2012, 2553-2555, and 2564 of title 10, United States Code
(d)   Sections 1385 and 3056 of title 18, United States Code
(e)   Public Law 94-524, “The Presidential Protection Assistance Act of 1976,”
      October 17, 1976, as amended
(f)   Sections 1535-1536 of title 31, United States Code
(g)   Sections 502 and 508 of title 32, United States Code
(h)   Section 5802 of Public Law 104-208, the Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act of
      1997, as amended
(i)   Sections 1966 and 1970 of title 2, United States Code
(j)   DoD Directive 3025.18, “Defense Support of Civil Authorities (DSCA),”
      December 29, 2010, as amended
(k)   DoD Directive 2000.15, “Support to Special Events,” November 21, 1994 (hereby
      cancelled)
(l)   DoD Directive 5410.18, “Public Affairs Community Relations Policy,” November 20, 2001
(m)   DoD Instruction 5410.19, “Public Affairs Community Relations Policy Implementation,”
      November 13, 2001
(n)   National Security Presidential Directive 46/Homeland Security Presidential Directive 15,
      Annex II, “Consolidation and Updating of Outdated Presidential Counterterrorism
      Documents,” March 6, 2006 1
(o)   DoD Instruction 3025.21, Defense Support of Civilian Law Enforcement Agencies,
      February 27, 2013
(p)   DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components
      That Affect United States Persons,” December 1982, as amended
(q)   DoD Directive 5111.13, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
      Security (ASD(HD&GS)),” March 23, 2018
(r)   DoD Directive 5122.05, “Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
      (ATSD(PA)),” August 7, 2017
(s)   DoD Directive 5105.77, “National Guard Bureau (NGB),” October 30, 2015, as amended
(t)   DoD Instruction 8320.02, “Sharing Data, Information, and Technology (IT) Services in the
      Department of Defense,” August 5, 2013
(u)   Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7, “Critical Infrastructure Identification,
      Prioritization, and Protection,” December 17, 2003
(v)   DoD Manual 8260.03, Volume 2, “Global Force Management Data Initiative (GFM DI)
      Implementation: The Organizational and Force Structure Construct (OFSC),” June 14, 2011


1
 This classified document is available through OASD(HD&GS) to users with the appropriate clearance based on
need to know.


Change 1, 05/24/2017                                  5                            ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

(w) Joint Action Plan for Developing Unity of Effort, December 13, 2010
(x) Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
    Associated Terms,” current edition




Change 1, 05/24/2017                          6                        ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall establish
policy for and facilitate the interagency coordination of special events with Federal, State, and
local agencies, and qualifying entities and the DoD Components, as required.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND DEFENSE AND GLOBAL
SECURITY (ASD(HD&GS)). The ASD(HD&GS), under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(P), shall:

    a. In coordination with the CJCS, oversee the management and coordination of DoD support
of special events including events covered under section 2564 of Reference (c).

  b. Serve as the principal civilian advisor to the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P) on
DoD support of special events.

    c. In accordance with DoDD 5111.13 (Reference (q)), approve requests for assistance from
civil authorities and qualifying entities for DoD support of special events. Such requests shall be
coordinated with appropriate offices within OSD, with the CJCS, and with the heads of
appropriate DoD Components. The ASD(HD&GS) will immediately notify the Secretary of
Defense and the USD(P) when this authority is exercised.

   d. Coordinate, or consult on, special event support policy with other Federal departments
and agencies (which may include the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the U.S. Secret Service (USSS), and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)) and with other qualifying entities as appropriate.

   e. Develop, coordinate, and oversee the implementation of DoD support of special events.

    f. Through the CJCS, monitor the activation, deployment, and employment of DoD
personnel, facilities, and other resources involved in DoD support of special events.

   g. Coordinate DoD support of special events with the General Counsel of the Department of
Defense (GC DoD) and the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO).

    h. Coordinate with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs (ASD(PA)) to
ensure that information relating to DoD support of special events receives appropriate
dissemination using all approved media.




Change 1, 05/24/2017                             7                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

    i. Represent DoD regarding special events to other Federal departments and agencies, State
and local authorities, and qualifying entities, including designating the DoD representatives for
the working groups identified in section 2 of Enclosure 3 of this Instruction.

  j. Manage, in conjunction with the USD(C)/CFO, the Support for International Sporting
Competitions (SISC) Defense Account.

    k. In accordance with Reference (h), notify the congressional defense committees of DoD
plans to obligate funds in the SISC Defense Account.

    l. In accordance with section 2564 of Reference (c), submit an annual report to Congress, no
later than January 30 of each year following a year in which DoD provides assistance under
section 2564 of Reference (c), detailing DoD support to certain sporting competitions.


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall coordinate on DoD support of special events and, in
coordination with the CJCS, provide advice regarding the effect the requested support will have
on readiness and military operations.


4. USD(C)/CFO. The USD(C)/CFO shall:

    a. Coordinate on DoD support of special events, and provide advice regarding the effect on
the DoD budget and on DoD financial resources.

   b. Maintain the SISC Defense Account in conjunction with the ASD(HD&GS).


5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L) shall coordinate on DoD logistical support of
special events.


6. GC DoD. The GC DoD shall coordinate and provide legal counsel on DoD support of special
events.


7. ASD(PA). The ASD(PA) shall provide policy guidance and review, coordinate, and approve
requests for ceremonial and entertainment support for special events covered by this Instruction,
in accordance with References (l) and (m) and DoDD 5122.05 (Reference (r)).


8. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

   a. Designate and maintain an OPR for special events or a special events coordinator, and



Change 1, 05/24/2017                            8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

provide that OPR designation and contact information to the CJCS within 60 days of the
publication of this Instruction. Changes to OPR designation and contact information shall be
provided to the CJCS within 30 days of the change.

   b. Provide personnel, equipment, and support of special events as directed.

    c. Ensure that personnel supporting special events comply with applicable antiterrorism and
force protection training and standards.

   d. Provide other support of special events as directed.


9. CJCS. The CJCS shall:

   a. Provide planning guidance to DoD Components for all special events for which DoD
support may require the employment of military forces or centralized command and control.

    b. Review all requests for DoD support of special events and, in coordination with the
USD(P&R), provide advice on the effect that the requested support will have on readiness and
military operations.

   c. Prepare, staff, and issue orders and messages on DoD support of special events that has
been approved by authorized DoD officials.

   d. Issue guidance to the Combatant Commanders on the implementation of this Instruction.

   e. Process requests for DoD support of special events.

   f. Maintain sufficient staff to manage the day-to-day operational aspects of DoD support of
special events.

   g. Manage and maintain equipment that is procured to support DoD special events.

        (1) Establish and operate a system for delivering DoD assets to authorized recipients and
for recovering loaned assets at the conclusion of the event.

       (2) Ensure the civil authorities and qualifying entities authorized to accept DoD assets
provide a surety bond or other suitable insurance protection to cover the cost of lost, stolen, or
damaged DoD property.

       (3) Plan and program for the life-cycle replacement of special events equipment
procured under Reference (c).

       (4) Procure goods and services through contracting, when necessary and authorized by
law.




Change 1, 05/24/2017                              9                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

    h. Administer the expenditure of appropriated funds, and ensure that the DoD is reimbursed
for its support of special events when required by law or DoD policy.

        (1) With the assistance of the DoD Components, provide cost estimates of DoD support
to a special event that is under consideration for approval.

          (2) Upon approval, administer the execution of funding for DoD support of special
events.

       (3) At the conclusion of DoD support to a special event, collect and provide a financial
accounting for all DoD funds expended in support of that special event.

    i. Establish and maintain effective liaison with DoD Components for the timely exchange of
information about special event projects.

   j. Provide other support of special events as directed.


10. CHIEF, NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU (NGB). The Chief, NGB, under the authority,
direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense through the Secretary of the Army and the
Secretary of the Air Force, shall:

   a. Serve as the channel of communications for all matters pertaining to the National Guard
between DoD Components and the States in accordance with DoDD 5105.77 (Reference (s)).

    b. Report National Guard special event support of civil authorities or qualifying entities
when using Federal resources, equipment, or funding to the National Joint Operations and
Intelligence Center.

    c. Serve as an advisor to the Combatant Commanders on National Guard matters pertaining
to the combatant command missions, and support planning and coordination for DoD support of
special events as requested by the CJCS or the Combatant Commanders.

    d. Ensure that National Guard appropriations are appropriately reimbursed for special event
activities.

   e. Advocate for needed special event capabilities.

   f. Develop, in accordance with Reference (s) and in coordination with the Secretaries of the
Army and Air Force and the ASD(HD&GS), guidance regarding this Instruction as it relates to
National Guard matters.




Change 1, 05/24/2017                            10                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

   a. This enclosure provides the basic procedures for DoD support of special events.

   b. As appropriate, the ASD(HD&GS) may issue amplifying procedures regarding DoD
support of special events and may release those procedures in the most effective medium
consistent with DoDI 8320.02 (Reference (t)).


2. SPECIAL EVENT PROCESS

   a. Engagement

         (1) Engagement may be initiated by the DoD, civil authorities, or qualifying entities. If
the initial engagement is not a written RFA, representatives of the ASD(HD&GS) and the Joint
Staff will confer to determine actual requirements.

       (2) Engagement may involve informational briefings and meetings between DoD
representatives and special event organizers, civil authorities, or qualifying entities. These
informal engagements may result in non-DoD entities submitting an RFA to the DoD Executive
Secretary, requesting DoD support for a special event.

       (3) Once an RFA is received, it will be sent to the ASD(HD&GS) and the CJCS
simultaneously for staffing and recommendation. Additional engagement with the requestor may
be required to quantify the scope and magnitude of the support requested.

   b. Planning

       (1) The direction and focus of DoD special-event planning will depend on the nature of
the event and scope and magnitude of the support requested or anticipated. International events
may require additional planning, procedures, and coordination with the government of the host
country.

        (2) For NSSEs and events that may require the employment of military forces and
centralized command and control, the CJCS will issue a planning order requesting a Combatant
Commander to initiate planning and notify potential supporting commands or organizations and
the Chief, NGB, as appropriate. When possible, established CJCS-directed planning procedures
will be used for the Combatant Commander to provide an assessment and request for forces.

           (a) The NSSE designation process generally is initiated by a formal written request to
the Secretary of Homeland Security by the State or local government hosting the event. In other



Change 1, 05/24/2017                            11                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

situations where the event is federally sponsored, an appropriate Federal official will make the
request.

           (b) Once the request is received by DHS, the USSS and the FBI will send an NSSE
questionnaire to the responsible host official for completion. The request, completed
questionnaires, and other supporting information are reviewed by the NSSE Working Group
(which includes a non-voting DoD member), which provides a recommendation to the Secretary
of Homeland Security regarding NSSE designation.

           (c) The Secretary of Homeland Security makes the final determination to designate
an event as an NSSE pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 (Reference (u)).

        (3) There are numerous events where DoD support should be anticipated and a planning
order issued to the appropriate Combatant Commander. These include, but are not limited to:

            (a) The President’s State of the Union Address or other address to a joint session of
Congress.

            (b) Annual meetings of the United Nations General Assembly.

            (c) National Presidential nominating conventions.

            (d) Presidential inaugural activities.

            (e) International summits or meetings.

            (f) State funerals.

            (g) The National Boy Scout Jamboree.

            (h) Certain international or domestic sporting competitions.

        (4) There are other events that the DoD supports that do not involve the assignment of
military forces or centralized command and control by Combatant Commanders, which include
planning requirements by the host organizations. These include, but are not limited to:

            (a) Military Department or Service-sponsored events, such as:

               1. The Marine Corps Marathon.

               2. The Army 10-Miler.

               3. Navy Fleet Week events.

               4. Installation or Joint Service open houses.




Change 1, 05/24/2017                             12                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

               5. Service or Joint Service air shows.

           (b) Community relations activities authorized in accordance with Reference (m).

        (5) The DoD may provide support to certain sporting events that are included under
subsection (c) of section 2564 of Reference (c) by providing technical, contracting, and
specialized equipment support. These events may be funded by the SISC Defense Account
pursuant to section 2564 of Reference (c) and include:

           (a) The Special Olympics.

           (b) The Paralympics.

           (c) Sporting events sanctioned by the United States Olympic Committee (USOC)
through the Paralympic Military Program.

           (d) Other international or domestic Paralympic sporting events that are held in the
United States or its territories, governed by the International Paralympic Committee, and
sanctioned by the USOC:

                  1. For which participation exceeds 100 amateur athletes.

                    2. In which at least 10 percent of the athletes participating in the sporting
event are either members or former members of U.S. Military Services who are participating in
the sporting event based upon an injury or wound incurred in the line of duty or veterans who are
participating in the sporting event based upon a service-connected disability.

       (6) Planning for DoD support to the Olympics and certain other sporting events requires
additional considerations.

            (a) Subsections (a) and (b) of section 2564 of Reference (c) authorize the Secretary
of Defense to provide assistance for the Olympics and certain other sporting events. Unless the
event meets the specific requirements stated in subparagraph 2.b.(5) of this enclosure, the
Attorney General must certify that DoD security and safety assistance is necessary to meet
essential security and safety needs of the event.

           (b) The DoD, led by the ASD(HD&GS), will collaborate with the CJCS, the
Department of Justice, including the FBI, and other appropriate DoD Components and Federal
departments or agencies, usually as part of a Joint Advisory Committee (JAC), to provide a
recommendation to the Attorney General on what categories of support the DoD may be able to
provide to meet essential security and safety needs of the event.

            (c) Support other than safety and security may be authorized for sporting events, but
only to the extent that:

               1. Such needs cannot reasonably be met by a source other than the DoD.



Change 1, 05/24/2017                           13                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                      DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012



               2. Such assistance does not adversely affect military preparedness.

               3. The requestor of such assistance agrees to reimburse the DoD in accordance
with the provisions of Reference (c) and other applicable provisions of law.

       (7) Types of support that the DoD can provide include, but are not limited to:

           (a) Aviation.

           (b) Communications (e.g., radios, mobile telephones, signal integrators).

           (c) Security (e.g., magnetometers, closed-circuit televisions, perimeter alarm
systems, undercarriage inspection devices).

           (d) Operations and command centers (e.g., design and configuration, video walls).

            (e) Explosive ordnance detection and disposal (technical advice, explosive ordnance
disposal teams, explosive detector dogs, dog teams).

           (f) Logistics (transportation, temporary facilities, food, lodging).

           (g) Ceremonial support (in coordination with the ASD(PA)).

          (h) Chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear threat identification, reduction,
and response capabilities.

           (i) Incident response capabilities (in coordination with the Department of Justice,
DHS, the Department of Health and Human Services, and in consultation with appropriate State
and local authorities).

        (8) DoD personnel support of special events is provided using a total force sourcing
solution that may include Active Duty and Reserve Component military personnel, DoD civilian
personnel, and DoD contractor personnel. The DoD also may decide to respond to requests for
assistance by approving, with the consent of the Governor(s) concerned, National Guard forces
performing duty pursuant to section 502 of Reference (g).

           (a) National Guard personnel conducting support of special events while on State
active duty, at the direction of their Governor or Adjutant General, are not considered to be
providing DoD support of special events.

           (b) This Instruction does not limit or affect DoD and National Guard personnel
volunteering to support special events during their non-duty time. This volunteer support is not
considered as part of DoD support of special events. Volunteers are prohibited from obligating
or using DoD resources to support a special event while in a volunteer status except as
authorized by separate statute or authority.



Change 1, 05/24/2017                            14                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012



   c. Coordination

        (1) Coordination of DoD support of special events will likely take place simultaneously
with engagement and planning; operate across the full spectrum of strategic, operational, and
tactical levels; and occur internally among DoD Components and externally with supported civil
authorities and qualifying entities.

          (a) Policy coordination at the departmental level between DoD and other Federal
departments or agencies is the responsibility of the ASD(HD&GS). Other DoD Components
may send representatives to these meetings with the prior concurrence of the ASD(HD&GS).
Standing departmental-level special events coordination meetings include:

               1. USSS-led NSSE Working Group.

               2. DHS-led Special Events Working Group.

               3. Department of State, Bureau of Diplomatic Security-led International Sporting
Event Group.

          (b) Coordination within the DoD is led by the ASD(HD&GS) and is facilitated by
the CJCS for the Combatant Commands and other joint commands and by other DoD
Component Heads for their constituent elements.

           (c) The CJCS will work with the Military Service Chiefs, the Chief of the National
Guard Bureau, and the Heads of DoD Components when subject matter expertise is needed for
the event organizers. This will be based upon location and other criteria, as needed.

        (2) Inputs to the DHS-produced Integrated Federal Support Overview (IFSO) will be
solicited by the CJCS and sent to the ASD(HD&GS) for consolidation and deconfliction prior to
final submission to DHS. DoD Component Heads not tasked by the Joint Staff will submit their
input directly to the ASD(HD&GS).

       (3) RFAs for DoD support will adhere to the following:

             (a) An RFA for DoD support to a special event may be made by Federal, State, or
local civil authorities, or by qualifying entities.

           (b) RFAs will be in writing and addressed to the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy
Secretary of Defense, or the DoD Executive Secretary, 1000 Defense, Pentagon, Washington,
D.C., 20301-1000. DoD Components who receive RFAs directly from the requestor will
immediately forward them to the DoD Executive Secretary for disposition, distribution, and
tracking.

            (c) At a minimum, the RFA will be distributed to the ASD(HD&GS) and the CJCS
for staffing and recommendation. If the RFA is for a single capability for which a DoD



Change 1, 05/24/2017                          15                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

Component is the OPR or serves as a DoD Executive Agent, the RFA is sent to that Component
for action with an information copy provided to the ASD(HD&GS) and the CJCS.

           (d) Vetting of RFAs will be in accordance with the DoD Global Force Management
process and consistent with criteria published in DoDM 8260.03, Volume 2 (Reference (v)).

             (e) Heads of DoD Components will consult with the DoD Executive Secretary on
which DoD official will communicate DoD special event support decisions to the requesting
authorities.

   d. Execution. Execution of DoD support of special events is a shared responsibility. The
scope and magnitude of the support being provided will determine the OPR and level of
execution.

        (1) When joint military forces or centralized command and control of DoD support to a
special event are anticipated or required, a Combatant Commander may be identified as the
supported commander in a properly approved order issued by the CJCS. The designated
Combatant Command shall be the focal point for execution of DoD support to that special event
with other DoD Components in support. Reporting requirements shall be in accordance with the
properly approved order issued by the CJCS and standing business practices.

       (2) When there are no joint military forces required and there is no need for centralized
command and control, DoD support of special events shall be executed by the CJCS or the Head
of a DoD Component, as designated in a properly approved order or message issued by the
CJCS. Oversight of DoD support will be provided by the ASD(HD&GS).

        (3) As described in the Joint Action Plan for Developing Unity of Effort (Reference (w)),
when Federal military forces and State military forces are employed simultaneously in support of
civil authorities in the United States, appointment of a dual-status commander is the usual and
customary command and control arrangement. Appointment of a dual-status commander
requires action by the President and the appropriate Governor (or their designees).

   e. Recovery

        (1) Durable, non-unit equipment procured by DoD to support a special event shall be
retained by the CJCS for use during future events in accordance with paragraph 9.g. of Enclosure
2 of this Instruction.

        (2) An after-action report shall be produced by the Combatant Command or OPR and
sent to the ASD(HD&GS) and the CJCS within 60 days of completion of the event.




Change 1, 05/24/2017                           16                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                      DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

                                             GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACROYNYMS


ASD(HD&GS)          Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global Security
ASD(PA)             Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs

CJCS                Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DHS                 Department of Homeland Security
DoDD                Department of Defense Directive
DSCA                Defense Support of Civil Authorities

FBI                 Federal Bureau of Investigations
FEMA                Federal Emergency Management Agency

GC DoD              General Counsel of the Department of Defense

IFSO                Integrated Federal Support Overview

JAC                 Joint Advisory Committee

NGB                 National Guard Bureau
NSSE                National Special Security Event

OPR                 office of primary responsibility

RFA                 request for assistance

SISC                Support for International Sporting Competitions

USD(AT&L)           Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(C)/CFO          Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                    Department of Defense
USD(P)              Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)            Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USOC                United States Olympic Committee
USSS                United States Secret Service


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.




Change 1, 05/24/2017                            17                             GLOSSARY
                                                                       DoDI 3025.20, April 6, 2012

civil authorities. Defined in the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference
(x)).

IFSO. A collaborative effort of the Special Events Working Group. The purpose of the IFSO is
to inform the Secretary of Homeland Security and other appropriate senior Federal officials,
including the Federal coordinator for the special event, of all the Federal activities and support in
preparation for and execution of a special event. The IFSO facilitates the Federal coordinator’s
ability to lead a unified coordination group initially in case of an incident to support the
Secretary of Homeland Security’s incident management responsibilities. It also educates Federal
interagency partners on Federal resources committed to the special event.

NSSE. An event of national significance as determined by the Secretary of Homeland Security.
These national or international events, occurrences, contests, activities, or meetings, which, by
virtue of their profile or status, represent a significant target, and therefore warrant additional
preparation, planning, and mitigation efforts. The USSS, FBI, and FEMA are the Federal
agencies with lead responsibilities for NSSEs; other Federal agencies, including DoD, may
provide support to the NSSE if authorized by law.

NSSE Executive Steering Committee. Established when the Secretary of Homeland Security
designates a specific event to be an NSSE. The group, led by the USSS, comprises Federal,
State, and local public safety and security officials whose primary responsibility is to coordinate
and develop a specific security plan for the designated NSSE.

qualifying entity. A non-governmental organization to which the DoD may provide assistance
by virtue of statute, regulation, policy, or other approval by the Secretary of Defense or his or her
authorized designee.

special event. An international or domestic event, contest, activity, or meeting, which by its very
nature, or by specific statutory or regulatory authority, may warrant security, safety, and other
logistical support or assistance from the DoD. Event status is not determined by the DoD, and
support may be requested by either civil authorities or non-governmental entities. Support
provided may be reimbursable.

Special Event Working Group. A single forum designed to ensure comprehensive and
coordinated Federal interagency awareness of, and appropriate support to, special events. The
Special Event Working Group is co-chaired by representatives from DHS (including the USSS
and FEMA) and the FBI, and comprises representatives from more than 40 Federal departments
and agencies including the DoD, the Departments of Homeland Security, Justice, State, Energy,
Labor, Health and Human Services, and Commerce, the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence, and the Environmental Protection Agency. The DoD representative on the Special
Event Working Group is designated by the ASD(HD&GS).




Change 1, 05/24/2017                             18                            GLOSSARY
