                                    Department of Defense
                                    INSTRUCTION
                                                                             NUMBER 1340.25
                                                                             September 28, 2010

                                                                                     USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Combat Zone Tax Exclusion (CZTE)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5124.02 (Reference (a)), this
Instruction establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures governing the
designation of areas in which members of the U.S. Armed Forces are eligible for the CZTE, and
the periodic review of such designations.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department
of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

     a. A member of the U.S. Armed Forces (hereafter Armed Forces) may be eligible for the
CZTE in accordance with section 112 of title 26, United States Code (U.S.C.); section 1.112-1 of
title 26, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR); Public Laws 104-117 and 106-21; and chapter 44 of
Volume 7A of DoD 7000.14-R (References (b) through (f), respectively).

  b. A member of the Armed Forces is entitled to the CZTE if for any period during a calendar
month the member performs active service in:

       (1) A combat zone (CZ) designated by the President in an executive order; such
executive order shall be listed in chapter 44 of Reference (f);
                                                                DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010

       (2) A qualified hazardous duty area (QHDA) designated by Congress in accordance with
References (d) and (e), is treated as if it were a CZ (in accordance with Reference (b)), provided
a member is also entitled to hostile fire pay or imminent danger pay (HFP/IDP) in accordance
with section 310 of title 37, U.S.C. (Reference (g)); or

        (3) An area outside the CZ or QHDA when the Principal Deputy Under Secretary of
Defense for Personnel and Readiness (PDUSD(P&R)) certifies that such military service is in
direct support of military operations in a CZ or QHDA, as applicable, and the member is entitled
to HFP/IDP (References (c) through (f)). The HFP/IDP entitlement must be directly related to
military operations in the CZ or QHDA.

    c. For purposes of Federal income tax, the gross income of an Armed Forces member, as
indicated in paragraphs 1.c.(1) and (2) of this Instruction, does not include military compensation
(References (b) and (c)) earned for active service (Sections 101(20) and 204 of Reference (g))
performed during any part of a month in which a member is entitled to CZTE. Specifically, the
amount of military compensation excluded from gross income during an entitlement month is as
follows:

       (1) All earned military compensation for enlisted members and warrant officers
(Reference (b)). Warrant officers are not commissioned officers for purposes of CZTE.

        (2) For commissioned officers, earned military compensation up to the highest rate of
monthly enlisted basic pay payable for a senior enlisted member serving as Sergeant Major of
the Army or Marine Corps; Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy or Coast Guard; Chief Master
Sergeant of the Air Force; and Senior Enlisted Advisor of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff (grade E-9) regardless of years of service (Reference (b)), plus the monthly amount of
HFP/IDP payable under section 310 of Reference (g).

    d. Members who are absent from a CZ, QHDA, or direct support duty assignment due to a
wound, injury, disease, prisoner or missing status, or other lawful cause, such as official leave,
temporary duty or temporary additional duty (TDY/TAD), may be subject to paragraph 1.e of
this enclosure.

    e. An Armed Forces member who is hospitalized or re-hospitalized as a result of a wound,
injury, or disease incurred while serving in a CZ or QHDA, or in direct support of military
operations in a CZ, is entitled to CZTE until the member’s status as a hospital inpatient ceases by
reason of discharge from the hospital. This entitlement may not apply to any month beginning
more than 2 years after the date of termination of combatant activities in the CZ or QHDA.

    f. Income tax liability is forgiven for a member who dies in a combat zone, or as a result of
injuries incurred in a combat zone, for the year of death as well as any prior tax year ending on
or after the member’s first day of service in a combat zone. Additionally, unpaid taxes still due
at the time of death, for years prior to service in the combat zone, will also be forgiven.

   g. Military basic pay earned for services performed in a CZ, QHDA, or in direct support of a
CZ or QHDA, while excluded from Federal income tax withholding under Reference (b),



                                                 2
                                                             DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010

remains subject to deduction for social security tax and Medicare tax. Although the State in
which a member claims legal residence may tax military compensation earned in the CZ or
QHDA, no state income taxes will be deducted by the Department of Defense. The Armed
Forces member is responsible for paying any State tax liabilities on such military compensation.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. Enclosure 3 contains procedures for the administration of CZTE and
describes the circumstances under which a member of the Armed Forces is eligible for CZTE.


7. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective immediately.




                                                Clifford L. Stanley
                                                Under Secretary of Defense
                                                for Personnel and Readiness

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. CZTE Entitlement and Review
   4. Review of Areas Designated for CZTE
   Glossary




                                                3
                                                             DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010

                                        ENCLOSURE 1

                                         REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b)   Section 112 of title 26, United States Code
(c)   Section 1.112-1 of title 26, Code of Federal Regulations
(d)   Public Law 104-117, “Treatment of Certain Individuals Performing Services in Certain
      Hazardous Duty Areas,” March 20, 1996
(e)   Public Law 106-21, “Availability of Certain Tax Benefits for Services as Part of Operation
      ALLIED FORCE,” April 19, 1999
(f)   DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulations (FMRs),”
      Volume 7A, “Military Pay Policy and Procedures-Active Duty and Reserve Pay,”
      as amended
(g)   Sections 101, 204, and 310 of title 37, United States Code
(h)   Joint Publication 1-02, “Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated
      Terms,” current edition




                                                4                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                             DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. PDUSD(P&R). The PDUSD(P&R), under the authority, direction, and control of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall:

   a. Serve as the decision maker for CZTE determinations.

   b. Oversee the development and implementation of CZTE policy and develop related
procedures for administration of such policies.

    c. Review and evaluate requests for CZTE area designations forwarded by the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Make appropriate certifications regarding CZTE direct support
requests.

    d. Establish guidance and procedures for conducting the periodic review of CZTE area
designations and certifications.

    e. Request changes be made to the DoD 7000.14-R (Reference (f)) to implement CZTE
determinations, as necessary.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS
(ASD(ISA)), ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND SECURITY AND
AMERICA’S SECURITY AFFAIRS (ASD(HD&ASA)), AND THE ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS (ASD(APSA)). The
ASD(ISA), ASD(HD&ASA), and ASD(APSA), all under the authority, direction, and control of
the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, shall, as applicable, review and provide a politico-
military analysis of direct support requests.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall oversee implementation of this Instruction in their respective Departments.


4. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:

  a. Evaluate, in coordination with the Military Departments, all geographic Combatant
Commander requests for CZTE direct support certifications.

    b. Ensure Geographic Combatant Commanders submit the PDUSD(P&R) determinations of
fact and requested periodic reviews (Enclosures 3 and 4) for designated CZ, QHDA, and
certified direct support areas. Based on these determinations and reviews, the Chairman of the



                                               5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010

Joint Chiefs of Staff shall make appropriate recommendations to PDUSD(P&R) on the initiation,
continuation, modification, or termination of such designations or certifications.


5. COMMANDERS OF THE GEOGRAPHIC COMBATANT COMMANDS. The
Commanders of the geographic Combatant Commands shall:

   a. Submit to the PDUSD(P&R), through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, all
requests for CZTE direct support certifications, with relevant determinations of fact (see
Enclosures 3 and 4).

    b. Submit to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff periodic determinations of fact for CZ,
QHDA, and direct support areas recommending initiation, continuation, modification, or
termination of CZTE designations or certifications for such areas.




                                                6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010

                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                            CZTE ENTITLEMENT AND REVIEW


1. DETERMINATIONS OF FACT

    a. CZ or QHDA. An Armed Forces member is entitled to CZTE for an entire month for any
portion of a month in which the member performs active service in a CZ or QHDA, consistent
with paragraph 4.b above the signature of this Instruction.

       (1) Active service in a CZ or QHDA, as defined under section 101(20) of Reference (g),
includes, but is not limited to:

            (a) A member’s absence from a duty assignment in the CZ or QHDA due to a
wound, injury, disease, internment by the enemy, or other lawful cause, such as official leave or
TDY/TAD. However, in instances when the member’s absence from the CZ or QHDA for
official leave or temporary duty/temporary additional duty (TDY/TAD) extends over a period
which includes a full calendar month, the tax exclusion may not be allowed for that full calendar
month.

             (b) A member’s performance of official TDY/TAD in the CZ or QHDA, even if only
for a brief period. However, a member who passes over or through the CZ or QHDA designated
airspace during the course of a trip between two points, both of which may lie outside the CZ or
QHDA, is entitled to CZTE only if the member is assigned to perform duty in the designated
airspace of the CZ or QHDA or qualifies for HFP/IDP as a result of the flight.

            (c) A member’s absence from a duty assignment in the CZ or QHDA as a result of
becoming a prisoner of war (POW) or missing in action (MIA). The member is deemed to
continue in active service in the CZ or QHDA for the period in which the member remains in
such status for military pay purposes.

       (2) Active service in the CZ or QHDA does not include:

         (a) A member who is in the CZ or QHDA on leave from a duty station outside the
CZ or QHDA.

          (b) A member who is in the CZ or QHDA solely for the member’s personal
convenience.

            (c) A member who is in the CZ or QHDA while “in transit” by any means (including
vessel, aircraft, and land conveyance) and is not assigned to the CZ or QHDA.

   b. Direct Support. An Armed Forces member is entitled to CZTE for an entire month for
any portion of a month in which the member performs active service certified by the




                                                7                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010

PDUSD(P&R) as in direct support of military operations in a CZ or QHDA (References (c) and
(f)).

       (1) Service may be certified in direct support if the member:

           (a) Performs active service that maintains, upholds, or provides direct assistance for
those involved in military operations in the CZ or QHDA;

           (b) Qualifies for HFP/IDP during that month; and,

       (2) Examples of members’ service considered in direct support of military operations in
the CZ or QHDA are:

           (a) Members who render services on a supply vessel transporting necessary supplies
to a CZ or QHDA.

             (b) Members who operate, load, or maintain aircraft and who maintain and control
the airstrip used to transport supplies and personnel from a nearby country outside the CZ or
QHDA to a location within the CZ or QHDA.

            (c) Members who are absent from a direct support duty assignment due to a wound,
injury, disease, prisoner of war (POW) or missing in action (MIA) status, or other lawful cause,
such as official leave or TDY/TAD, consistent with subparagraph 1.a.(1) of this enclosure.


2. UNIT COMMANDER CZTE DIRECT SUPPORT CERTIFICATION REQUESTS

    a. Requests for direct support certification shall be submitted through the geographic
Combatant Command and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the PDUSD(P&R) on
behalf of members who perform active service that directly maintains, upholds, or provides
assistance for those involved in military operations in a CZ or QHDA. Requests for direct
support certification shall include:

        (1) The unit commander’s delineation of the scope of the direct support area proposed
for certification, limited to the smallest geographical area (e.g., portions of countries or seas) in
which direct assistance is provided for those involved in military operations in the CZ or QHDA,
to include the most current CZTE determination of fact prepared consistent with section 1 of this
enclosure.

       (2) The most current review of areas designated for CZTE, prepared in accordance with
Enclosure 4.

       (3) The geographic Combatant Commander’s recommendation.

       (4) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s recommendation regarding the request, as
coordinated with the Secretaries of the Military Departments.



                                                  8                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010



    b. The PDUSD(P&R) shall review the request and the politico-military analysis of the
ASD(ISA), the ASD(HD&ASA), or the ASD(APSA), as applicable. If the direct support request
is approved:

      (1) The PDUSD(P&R), in coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the ASD(ISA), ASD(HD&ASA), or the ASD(APSA), as applicable, shall determine the final
parameters and effective date of the direct support certification.

       (2) The PDUSD(P&R) shall terminate the direct support certification when circumstances
no longer warrant the continuation of such certification. Normally, a direct support certification
remains in effect until terminated either as a result of the recommendations of the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff or a periodic review.


3. TERMINATION OF CZ OR QHDA DESIGNATIONS. The PDUSD(P&R) shall process
and forward a recommendation through appropriate channels (e.g., the Office of Management
and Budget, for executive orders) when CZ or QHDA designations are no longer warranted.


4. REVIEW OF CZ, QHDA, AND DIRECT SUPPORT AREAS. Commanders shall establish
procedures for the review of CZTE areas to ensure continued certification is warranted. If at any
time a certification is no longer warranted, such commander shall advise the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, who shall then review the situation and forward the appropriate
recommendation to the PDUSD(P&R). At the periodic request of the PDUSD(P&R) through the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the commander shall complete a review, by answering the
questions at Enclosure 4 of this Instruction, which shall be forwarded to the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff for consideration.


5. PUBLICATION. CZ designations by the President, QHDA designations by Congress, and
direct support certifications by the PDUSD(P&R) for CZTE purposes shall be published in
chapter 44 of Reference (f).




                                                9                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010

                                         ENCLOSURE 4

                     DoD REVIEW OF AREAS DESIGNATED FOR CZTE

                                    Table. CZTE Application

Instructions to Geographic Combatant Commanders: All of the following questions must be
answered. Please provide a narrative on a separate sheet for all answers.


1. Name of Area (Country, Province, City, Place).

2. Date of Submission.

3. Approximately how many U.S. Armed Forces Members are deployed in the area concerned?

4. Approximately how many U.S. Armed Forces Members are permanently assigned in the area
concerned?

5. Approximately how many command sponsored dependents are presently authorized in the area?

6. Do military members serve in a Combat Zone (CZ) or Qualified Hazardous Duty Area (QHDA)
or directly support military operations in a CZ or QHDA? If so, how?

7. Are military operations confined to a specific area?

8. Has the level of support for military operations in the CZ or QHDA changed since the initial
designation/certification? If so, how?

9. Has the size and composition of the military force changed?

10. Describe other conditions or factors in the area that contribute to the nature of the military
operations in the area. Provide rationale for any other anomalies.

11. Do members qualify for hostile fire pay or imminent danger pay (HFP/IDP) for service in
this area?

12. Is the reason for paying HFP/IDP based on risks or dangers related to the CZ or QHDA? If
so, how is the risk/danger related to the CZ or QHDA?


AUTHORIZED SIGNATURE:
                                        _______________________________________________
                                                   Geographic Combatant Commander




                                                 10                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010

                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART 1. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(APSA)   Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Affairs
ASD(ISA)    Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
ASD(HD&ASA) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Security and America’s Security
            Affairs

CFR                Code of Federal Regulations
CZ                 combat zone
CZTE               combat zone tax exclusion

HFP/IDP            hostile fire pay or imminent danger pay

MIA                missing in action

PDUSD(P&R)         Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
POW                prisoner of war

QHDA               qualified hazardous duty area

TDY/TAD            temporary duty or temporary additional duty

U.S.C.             United States Code


                                       PART 2. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction:

active duty. Full-time duty in the active service of a uniformed service, and includes full-time
training duty, annual training duty, full-time National Guard duty, and attendance, while in the
active service, at a school designated as a service school by law or by the Secretary concerned.

active service. Service on active duty.

certification. A PDUSD(P&R) action in response to a unit commander’s direct support request.

CZ. An area the President of the United States designates by executive order in accordance with
section 112 of Reference (b), as an area in which U.S. Armed Forces are or have engaged in
combat. In this context, the CZ is generally designated in response to a national emergency and
involves persistent, violent confrontations with hostile forces. Usually, an area becomes a CZ or
ceases to be a CZ on the dates the President designates by Executive order.



                                                 11                                  GLOSSARY
                                                               DoDI 1340.25, September 28, 2010



CZTE. The exclusion, for Federal income tax purposes, from gross income of military
compensation of members of the Armed Forces earned for active service performed in a CZ,
QHDA, or direct support areas.

CZTE area. A CZ, QHDA, or direct support area.

direct support area. An area outside the CZ or QHDA in which Armed Forces members may be
eligible for CZTE based on the performance of active service that maintains, upholds, or
provides direct assistance for those involved in military operations in the CZ or QHDA, and that
such service qualifies the member for HFP/IDP. Direct support areas must be certified by the
PDUSD(P&R).

gross income. All income from whatever source derived, unless excluded by law.

military compensation. Compensation paid by the Armed Forces of the United States to
members of the Armed Forces. It does not include pensions and retirement pay.

military operation. A military action that may involve carrying out a strategic, operational, or
tactical mission against a hostile or unfriendly force, to include carrying on combat and any
related movement, supply, attack, defense, and maneuvers needed to gain the objectives of a
battle or campaign.

QHDA. A congressionally designated area treated in the same manner as a CZ under Reference
(b) for Armed Forces members performing service in such areas, provided a member is entitled
to pay in accordance with section 310 of Reference (g).

U.S. Armed Forces. The Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard.




                                                12                                    GLOSSARY
