                             Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 1200.17
                                                                              October 29, 2008

                                                                                      USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Managing the Reserve Components as an Operational Force

References: (a) Title 10, United States Code
            (b) Title 32, United States Code
            (c) Joint Publication 1-02, “Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and
                Associated Terms,” as amended


1. PURPOSE. This Directive establishes the overarching set of principles and policies to
promote and support the management of the Reserve Components (RCs) as an operational force.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. The RCs provide operational capabilities and strategic depth to meet U.S. defense
requirements across the full spectrum of conflict including under sections 12301, 12302, 12304,
and 12306 of Reference (a).

     b. The Active Components (ACs) and RCs are integrated as a total force based on the
attributes of the particular component and individual competencies.

   c. Homeland Defense and Defense Support to Civil Authorities (DSCA) are total force
missions. Unity of effort is maintained consistent with statutory responsibilities in operations
involving Federal forces and non-federalized National Guard forces with Federal forces under
Federal command and control and non-federalized National Guard forces under State command
and control.
                                                                DoDD 1200.17, October 29, 2008



   d. The RCs provide connection to and commitment of the American public.

   e. The continuum of service is utilized to enhance the effectiveness of and sustain the all-
volunteer force with flexible service options that are attractive to a broad population.

   f. Utilization rules are implemented to govern frequency and duration of activations. Since
expectation management is critical to the success of the management of the RCs as an
operational force, these rules enhance predictability and judicious and prudent use of the RCs.

   g. Voluntary duty, per section 12301(d) of Reference (a) and section 502(f)(2) of title 32,
United States Code (Reference (b)), is encouraged to meet mission requirements.

    h. The RCs are resourced to meet readiness requirements per sections 3013, 5013, and 8013
of Reference (a). RC resourcing plans shall ensure visibility to track resources from formulation,
appropriation, and allocation through execution.

   i. Outreach services are established and available for RC members, their families, and
employers from pre-activation through reintegration.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure.


6. RELEASABILITY. Unlimited. This Directive is approved for public release. Copies may
be obtained through the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at
http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosure
   Responsibilities
   Glossary




                                              2
                                                               DoDD 1200.17, October 29, 2008


                                         ENCLOSURE

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall:

   a. Ensure DoD policies support the planning, organization, and utilization of the RCs to
provide operational capabilities and strategic depth across the full spectrum of conflict.

   b. Provide guidance and oversight for the development of programs.

    c. Provide guidance and oversight for employer and family support programs that fully
integrate AC and RC requirements.

    d. Ensure that total force policies encourage optimum integration of AC and RC personnel to
provide the most efficient training opportunities to all personnel, allow for shared use of
resources, and provide the most operational benefits and mission capability.

    e. Ensure that total force assignment policies encourage the consideration of RC members to
serve in key senior leadership positions throughout the Department of Defense.

    f. Develop performance targets (measures and milestones) in conjunction with the
Secretaries of the Military Departments for the Reserve operating forces in the development of
the DoD annual performance budget.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR RESERVE AFFAIRS (ASD(RA)). The
ASD(RA), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), shall:

    a. Develop policies for managing the RCs as an operational force, which is a necessity in an
era of persistent conflict and global engagement.

   b. Coordinate and develop policies that promote use of total force capabilities in support of
domestic disaster response without interference with core defense missions.

    c. Ensure that sufficient guidance exists to guide Service implementation of the continuum
of service concept.

    d. Develop policies that provide compensation, benefits, and incentives to sustain the
all-volunteer force that are commensurate with the service provided and encourage Service
members to continue to serve.

    e. Ensure that family and employer support outreach programs are sufficient to sustain the
all-volunteer force.



                                                3                                  ENCLOSURE
                                                               DoDD 1200.17, October 29, 2008


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)).
The ASD(HA), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), shall:

  a. Ensure policies are in place to support medical and dental readiness such that RC
members comply with required medical and dental standards pre-activation through deactivation.

   b. Ensure policies are in place to provide RC members and their families appropriate
medical, dental, and mental health services consistent with DoD programs to provide support to
America’s wounded, ill, and injured Service members.


4. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall establish
policies and develop procedures to ensure the RCs have operational capabilities and strategic
depth to meet U.S. defense requirements across the full spectrum of conflict.


5. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND DEFENSE AND
AMERICAS’ SECURITY AFFAIRS (ASD(HD&ASA)). The ASD(HD&ASA), under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), shall:

   a. Develop policies and procedures and provide guidance and oversight to ensure the RCs
have operational capabilities and strategic depth to meet U.S. homeland defense and DSCA
requirements across the full spectrum of missions while preserving unity of effort consistent with
applicable law and authority.

   b. Advocate resource requirements identified with homeland defense and DSCA.


6. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). The USD(C)/CFO shall:

   a. Provide requirements and instructions to the Department of Defense and Services
regarding program and budget justification materials for Program/Budget Review and
submission to the Congress.

    b. Assess Military Department compliance against the performance targets throughout the
planning, programming, budgeting, and execution (PPBE) process.


7. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L) shall establish policies and develop procedures
to ensure the RCs are managed as an effective operational force for all matters related to the
DoD Acquisition System; research and development; advanced technology; integrated test and
evaluation; production; logistics; installation management; military construction; procurement;
environmental security; and nuclear, chemical, and biological matters.




                                                4                                  ENCLOSURE
                                                               DoDD 1200.17, October 29, 2008


8. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)). The USD(I) shall
provide guidance and oversight to the intelligence elements of the RCs and establish practices
and develop procedures to ensure RCs are managed as an effective operational force.


9. DIRECTOR, PROGRAM ANALYSIS AND EVALUATION (PA&E). The Director, PA&E,
shall:

   a. Prepare programmatic guidance on which the Future Years Defense Program is based.
Prepare fiscal guidance in coordination with the USD(C)/CFO.

    b. Manage the program review phase of the PPBE system, including serving as the
Executive Secretary to the senior group advising the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense
on program review issues and as Chair of the group charged with overseeing the development of
those issues.


10. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

   a. Implement the provisions of this Directive.

   b. Manage their respective RCs as an operational force such that the RCs provide operational
capabilities while maintaining strategic depth to meet U.S. military requirements across the full
spectrum of conflict.

    c. Ensure that the RCs participate across the full spectrum of missions at home and abroad in
providing operational capabilities according to the national defense strategy, their Service force
management plans, and operational requirements. To the extent practicable and consistent with
the Services’ organizational constructs, ensure unit integrity is maintained, to include unit
leadership positions when RC units are utilized to fulfill operational requirements.

   d. Ensure that, while providing strategic depth, RC units and individuals train and are
available for missions in accordance with the national defense strategy.

     e. Ensure the total force and non-federalized National Guard forces, through coordination
with the National Guard Bureau, have capabilities useful for domestic disaster response and are
utilized in accordance with applicable Federal rules, without interference with defense missions.

   f. Ensure RC forces meet operational readiness requirements as identified by the President
and the Secretary of Defense.

    g. Ensure sufficient depth of RC unit and individual capabilities to meet established DoD
force utilization goals.




                                                5                                  ENCLOSURE
                                                                  DoDD 1200.17, October 29, 2008


     h. Ensure force rebalancing is conducted on a continuing basis to adjust force structure and
individual skill inventories to meet full spectrum operations while moderating excessive
utilization of the total force. Such rebalancing shall result in a force mix that takes into account
AC and RC capabilities and capacities.

    i. Integrate AC and RC organizations to the greatest extent practicable, including the use of
cross-component assignments, both AC to RC and RC to AC. Such assignments should be
considered as career enhancing and not detrimental to a Service member’s career progression.

   j. Align, to the extent practicable, force structure with established DoD goals for frequency
and duration of utilization for unit and individuals.

   k. Ensure the appropriate level of full-time support personnel -- AC, Active Guard and
Reserve, military technicians (dual-status), non-dual status technicians, and other Federal civilian
employees -- to meet the readiness requirements of the RCs.

   l. Implement the continuum of service construct in ways that sustain the all-volunteer force
and the willingness of individuals to serve.

        (1) Provide flexible service options, consistent with DoD policies, making military duty
attractive to a broad population.

        (2) Execute the appropriate range of compensation, benefits, and incentives to sustain the
all-volunteer force commensurate with the service provided. This encourages Service members
to continue to serve.

        (3) Implement utilization rules for voluntary and involuntary service that are clear and
effectively communicated. Implement related expectation management programs to provide
members, families, and employers maximum predictability and planning consistent with
operational requirements.

   m. To facilitate the sustainment of volunteerism:

      (1) Provide opportunities for and encourage the performance of military duty beyond
minimum participation requirements, consistent with Service needs.

       (2) Provide flexible participation options that conform to mission requirements.

            (a) As appropriate, provide monetary and non-monetary incentives to increase the
level of participation above and beyond minimum requirements.

          (b) Offer choices among available incentives according to individual preferences to
accomplish force management objectives.

           (c) Execute Military Service agreements and incentives to ensure the availability of
individuals who may be needed on short notice to meet mission requirements.



                                                  6                                   ENCLOSURE
                                                                DoDD 1200.17, October 29, 2008



    n. Program and execute resources where required to support a “train-mobilize-deploy”
construct. Funds for training and equipment must be provided to coincide with the Services’
force planning cycle and enable an effective pre- and post-mobilization training and deployment
process.

      (1) Ensure that resources support medical and dental readiness such that RC members
comply with required medical and dental standards pre-activation through deactivation.

      (2) Ensure resources are provided in a timely manner to ensure effective execution to
meet mission requirements.

       (3) Ensure procurement programs and processes provide visibility and accountability of
RC equipment in the Program/Budget justification materials through the timely execution of
funds and distribution of procured assets.

       (4) Ensure facilities and training areas are available to support RC training requirements.

       (5) Ensure legal assistance resources are available to support the activation of military
personnel.

    o. Accelerate modernization while balancing the need for restoring immediate readiness
through recapitalization with the imperative to prepare for future conflicts with more advanced
adversaries.

    p. Ensure RC forces have been considered for sourcing Combatant Commands’ requests
for forces.




                                                 7                                  ENCLOSURE
                                                                 DoDD 1200.17, October 29, 2008


                                           GLOSSARY

                                          DEFINITIONS


Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this Directive.

continuum of service. Management policies supported by appropriate statutes, benefit and
compensation options, and agreements that facilitate transparent movement, to the extent
possible, of individuals between active military, reserve military, and civilian service. These
management policies provide variable and flexible service options and levels of participation,
and are consistent with DoD manpower requirements and each individual’s ability to serve over
the course of a lifetime of service.

homeland defense. The protection of United States sovereignty, territory, domestic population,
and critical defense infrastructure against external threats and agression or other threats as
directed by the President. As defined in Joint Publication 1-02 (Reference (c)).

RCs as an operational force. The RCs provide operational capabilities and strategic depth to
meet U.S. defense requirements across the full spectrum of conflict. In their operational roles,
RCs participate in a full range of missions according to their Services’ force generation plans.
Units and individuals participate in missions in an established cyclic or periodic manner that
provides predictability for the combatant commands, the Services, Service members, their
families, and employers. In their strategic roles, RC units and individuals train or are available
for missions in accordance with the national defense strategy. As such, the RCs provide strategic
depth and are available to transition to operational roles as needed.

Reserve Components. The Reserve Components of the armed forces are: (1) The Army
National Guard of the United States. (2) The Army Reserve. (3) The Navy Reserve. (4) The
Marine Corps Reserve. (5) The Air National Guard of the United States. (6) The Air Force
Reserve. (7) The Coast Guard Reserve. (As defined in section 10101 of Reference (a).)

total force. The AC and RC military elements of the total force.

train-mobilize-deploy construct. A Service implemented model designed to train and certify
individual skills and limited unit collective training prior to mobilization to achieve a prescribed
level of readiness in order to limit post-mobilization training and maximize operational
deployment time.

voluntary duty. Duty performed by RC members who request or indicate willingness to accept
orders for active duty beyond any active duty obligation.




                                                  8                                    GLOSSARY
