                                   Department of Defense

                                        DIRECTIVE
                                                                              NUMBER 5515.09
                                                                                   April 19, 2004
                                                         Certified Current as of October 31, 2006

                                                                                        GC, DoD

SUBJECT: Settlement of Tort Claims

References: (a) DoD Directive 5515.9, "Settlement of Tort Claims," September 12, 1990
                (hereby canceled)
            (b) Sections 1346(b), 2671-2680 of title 28, United States Code
            (c) Section 113 of title 10, United States Code


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive:

   1.1. Reissues reference (a).

    1.2. Establishes policy for the administrative processing and, where appropriate, the
settlement of claims filed under reference (b) against the DoD Components other than the
Military Departments.

   1.3. Delegates authority, pursuant to reference (c), to the Secretary of the Army to process
and, where appropriate, settle claims under this Directive.


2. APPLICABILITY
This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military
Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of
the Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG, DoD), the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the "DoD Components").


3. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:
                                                                    DoDD 5515.09, April 19, 2004


    3.1. Claims filed under reference (b) arising from the acts or omissions of civilian personnel
of the DoD Components other than the Military Departments shall be processed and, if
appropriate, administratively settled pursuant to this Directive.

    3.2. DoD personnel shall cooperate in the processing of claims under this Directive,
including providing such assistance as the DoD Component processing the claims reasonably
requests.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    4.1. The General Counsel of the Department of Defense shall issue DoD Instructions and
other guidance to implement this Directive as appropriate.

    4.2. The Heads of the DoD Components (other than the Departments of the Air Force and
the Navy), when personnel of their components are involved in incidents generating claims under
this Directive, shall, upon the request of the Secretary of the Army, assist in the investigation and
processing of such claims in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the
Army. The Secretary of the Army may designate the DoD Components providing such
assistance as "claims processing offices" and attorneys or other personnel of the DoD
Components providing such assistance as "claims officers."

   4.3. The Secretary of the Army shall, under reference (c) and on behalf of the Secretary of
Defense:

        4.3.1. Process and, where appropriate, settle claims that are filed under reference (b) and
arise out of the acts or omissions of civilian personnel of the DoD Components other than the
Military Departments who, as determined by the Secretary of the Army, are acting within the
scope of their official duties.

        4.3.2. May re-delegate the responsibility assigned by paragraphs 4.2. and 4.3.1.above, to
personnel of the Department of the Army who are authorized under the regulations promulgated
by the Secretary of the Army to settle claims under reference (b) against the Department of the
Army.


5. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




                                                 2
