                             Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                           NUMBER 5160.48
                                                                               March 21, 2011
                                          Incorporating Change 1, Effective November 20, 2017

                                                                                     ATSD(PA)

SUBJECT: DoD Public Affairs and Visual Information (PA&VI) Education and Training
         (E&T)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5160.48 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction (DoDI) in
accordance with the authority in DoDD 5122.05 (Reference (b)) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities for PA&VI E&T across the DoD.

   b. Designates the Defense Information School (DINFOS) in the Defense Media Activity
(DMA) as the principal source of PA&VI E&T common core training in the DoD. The DINFOS
charter is at Enclosure 2.

   c. Implements PA&VI E&T guidance in References (b) through (i).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

    a. Joint-Service training. Consolidated training for two or more Military Departments,
including the Coast Guard.

    b. PA&VI E&T. All joint-Service PA&VI E&T supporting the mission areas of community
relations, media relations, internal information, visual information, and combat camera. Specific
career fields in PA&VI include broadcasting (radio and television), journalism (photo, broadcast,
                                                                  DoDI 5160.48, March 21, 2011


electronic, and print), still photography, videography, electronic imaging, lithography, graphic
arts, and related maintenance specialties.

   c. Service-specific training. Training to meet the requirements of a single Military
Department.

   d. Structure Manning Decision Review (SMDR). The established annual Army process used
by DINFOS to identify joint-Service training requirements for the out-years.

    e. Training Task Selection Board (TTSB). The principal forum for Military Department
representatives to identify and establish career-field training requirements to DINFOS. Those
requirements provide the basis for development of E&T programs at DINFOS or other sources,
such as contract training. Other DoD Components that have the authority to establish training
requirements may participate in the TTSB process.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Uniform standardized and cost-effective E&T programs, to include graphic arts and
lithography, shall be established and maintained to meet DoD E&T objectives for the PA&VI
career fields. Those programs shall meet the near-and long-term career development
requirements of Service members and DoD personnel.

    b. DINFOS shall be the principal DoD resource for joint-Service E&T in the PA&VI career
fields. DINFOS shall educate and train Service members and DoD personnel. DINFOS may
provide E&T to other Federal agencies and international students on a space-available and
reimbursable basis.

    c. All common-core E&T curriculums in the PA&VI career fields shall be consolidated
where possible to ensure training is accomplished in the most cost-effective manner. Service-
specific training shall be accomplished with joint-Service training where collocation is cost
effective; however, where more efficient, contracting out Service-unique requirements may be
pursued in coordination with the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
(ATSD(PA)), the Director, DMA, and the Military Departments.

    d. A uniform process shall be established by which the Military Departments may establish
PA&VI career field common core and Service-specific E&T requirements as the basis for
training program development at DINFOS.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 1, 11/20/2017                            2
                                                            DoDI 5160.48, March 21, 2011



7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective March 21, 2011.




                                            Douglas B. Wilson
                                            Assistant Secretary of Defense
                                              for Public Affairs

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. DINFOS Charter
   3. Responsibilities




Change 1, 11/20/2017                       3
                                                             DoDI 5160.48, March 21, 2011


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5160.48, “DoD Public Affairs and Visual Information (PA&VI) Education
      and Training (E&T),” July 2, 2004 (hereby cancelled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5122.05, “Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
      (ATSD(PA)),” August 7, 2017
(c)   DoD Directive 5105.74, “Defense Media Activity (DMA),” December 18, 2007, as
      amended
(d)   DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
      Management Program,” July 10, 2009, as amended
(e)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Functional Transfer and Consolidation of
      Service Training Activities at Fort Meade under DoD Field,” July 28, 1992
(f)   Section 153 of title 10, United States Code
(g)   DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” April 25, 2013, as amended
(h)   DoD Instruction 5400.13, “Public Affairs (PA) Operations,” October 15, 2008
(i)   DoD Directive 1322.18, “Military Training,” January 13, 2009, as amended




Change 1, 11/20/2017                         4                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDI 5160.48, March 21, 2011


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      DINFOS CHARTER


1. MISSION. To grow and sustain a corps of professional organizational communicators who
fulfill the communication needs of military leaders and audiences.


2. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

    a. DINFOS is the principal source of joint PA&VI E&T. The Commandant, DINFOS,
reports to the Director, DMA, who is under the authority, direction, and control of the
ATSD(PA) in accordance with Reference (b) and DoDD 5105.74 (Reference (c)). DINFOS
shall consist of a Commandant and such subordinate elements as the Commandant establishes,
within available resources.

    b. A Board of Directors of DINFOS, established in accordance with DoDI 5105.18
(Reference (d)), shall advise the ATSD(PA) on matters pertaining to DINFOS’ area of
responsibility, and shall consist of:

       (1) The ATSD(PA), serving as Chair.

       (2) The Chief or Director of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force and Coast Guard
Public Affairs or Information Office.

        (3) The Chief or Director of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force and Coast Guard
office for visual information matters.

       (4) The Director, DMA.

       (5) Representatives of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Under Secretary of
Defense for Personnel and Readiness, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and
Reserve Affairs, the Combatant Commands, and the Military Services’ training commands.


3. PROCEDURES. The Commandant, DINFOS, shall:

   a. Report to the Director, DMA.

   b. Enter into contracts, host-tenant inter-Service support agreements, or other arrangements
with private institutions, individuals, other governmental departments and agencies, colleges, and
universities to provide basic and advanced E&T, as well as base operating support.




Change 1, 11/20/2017                            5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5160.48, March 21, 2011


    c. Determine staff and faculty personnel requirements to support the operation of DINFOS
in accordance with available resources, manpower, and budget guidance provided by the
Director, DMA, and in coordination with the Military Services.

   d. Develop, implement, and maintain the TTSB process as the uniform process to establish
PA&VI career-field training requirements of OSD, the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands,
and the Military Departments for E&T programs to meet joint-Service common-core training
requirements, to include other DoD Components authorized to establish training requirements.

    e. Ensure the TTSB shall incorporate knowledge and skill performance standards to support
the training requirements of personnel assigned to joint billets in the PA&VI career fields.

   f. Implement a single and centralized training management system to identify DoD
Component student training quota requirements, allocate student quotas on a fair-share basis,
manage training seats, and provide other training management information in a cost-effective
and transparent manner.

    g. Maintain programs to perform periodic reviews for adequacy and compliance with
established standards in the areas of resource management, student services and
accommodations, equipment, facilities, quota management, and training program content.

    h. Publish an annual schedule of PA&VI courses not less than 1 year before the beginning of
the fiscal year for which the academic schedule pertains.




Change 1, 11/20/2017                           6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5160.48, March 21, 2011


                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ATSD(PA). The ATSD(PA) shall:

   a. Provide guidance to the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Directors of the
Defense Agencies in their respective areas of responsibility for DoD PA&VI E&T.

  b. Establish joint-Service E&T requirements for personnel assigned to joint billets in the
PA&VI career fields based on requirements gathered from the Military Departments and the
Combatant Commanders, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.


2. DIRECTOR, DMA. The Director, DMA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
ATSD(PA), shall:

   a. Oversee the planning, development, consolidation, execution, and evaluation of E&T
programs provided by DINFOS and other sources to meet Military Department training
requirements in the PA&VI career fields.

    b. Implement established DoD policy and provide guidance and procedures for the
development of PA&VI E&T programs to meet joint and Service-specific training requirements
established by the Military Departments for officer, enlisted, and civilian personnel; other
Federal and non-DoD agencies; and international students.

   c. Plan, budget, and provide manpower through the planning, programming, budgeting and
execution processes to:

       (1) Support DINFOS programs and operations.

        (2) Support new joint-Service training program requirements or revision of an existing
training program (stand-alone and Service-specific training requirements shall be resourced by
the Secretaries of the Military Departments).

        (3) Resource training programs commencing in the year that the required funding is
provided in the budget. Resources may include equipment or personnel for course development
and instruction.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

   a. Develop guidance to implement this Instruction within their Department as necessary.




Change 1, 11/20/2017                           7                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 5160.48, March 21, 2011


   b. Plan, program, and budget resources to support stand-alone and Service-specific training
requirements and Service-specific training requirements in the PA&VI career fields. At the
annual SMDR, provide training quota requirements for the out-years.

    c. Provide resources to support training of students when emergent short-term quota
requirements have not been programmed through the annual SMDR process and those
requirements exceed DINFOS’ capacity to train. Provide resources to support training of those
extra students as long as the training is required, while the DMA expeditiously secures resources
through the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution and personnel acquisition
processes.

   d. Assign members to serve as staff and faculty of DINFOS.

   e. Provide qualified representation to the TTSBs and related forums to establish joint and
Service-specific training requirements in the PA&VI career fields.

    f. Identify annual student training requirements for attending DINFOS by participation in a
single and centralized training management system. Execute timely entry and maintenance of
student data in Service-unique training management systems.

    g. Provide and maintain an interface between the centralized training management system
for DINFOS courses and Service-unique training management systems.




Change 1, 11/20/2017                            8                                ENCLOSURE 3
