                            Department of Defense
                               DIRECTIVE

                                                                              NUMBER 5205.75
                                                                               December 4, 2013
                                                            Incorporating Change 1, May 22, 2017

                                                                                   USD(I)/USD(P)

SUBJECT:      DoD Operations at U.S. Embassies

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5105.75 (Reference (a)) as DoDD 5205.75 to establish
policy and assign responsibilities for the operation of DoD elements at U.S. embassies pursuant
to sections 2321i and 3927(a) and (b) of Title 22, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (b))
and section 113(b) of Title 10, U.S.C. (Reference (c)), and consistent with the President’s letter
of instruction to Chiefs of Mission (Reference (d)).

    b. Designates the senior defense official/defense attaché (SDO/DATT) as the principal DoD
official in U.S. embassies, who serves as the diplomatically accredited defense attaché (DATT)
and chief of the security cooperation organization (SCO) (if an SCO is present).

   c. Provides direction to the SDO/DATT and establishes the management relationship
between the SDO/DATT and the heads of other DoD elements at U.S. embassies.

    d. Provides guidance on the consolidation of U.S. defense attaché offices (DAOs) and SCOs
in diplomatic missions.

   e. Incorporates and cancels DoDD 5132.12 (Reference (e)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department
of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
within the DoD (referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).
                                                             DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. DoD personnel in a foreign country who are not under the command of a U.S. geographic
combatant commander (GCC) will be under the authority of the chief of mission (COM) in that
country in accordance with subsections 3927(a) and (b) of Reference (b) and DoDD 2065.1E
(Reference (f)).

    b. Unified DoD representation in U.S. embassies is critical to the accomplishment of
national security objectives.

    c. The SDO/DATT is the COM’s principal advisor on defense issues and the senior
diplomatically accredited DoD military officer assigned to a U.S. diplomatic mission. All DoD
elements under COM authority are under the coordinating authority of the SDO/DATT, except
for the Marine security guard detachment and naval support units.

    d. SDO/DATT nominees may assume the title and responsibilities of the SDO/DATT only
after:

      (1) The Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)) and the Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) recommend appointment of the nominee as the SDO/DATT.

       (2) The nominee completes all required training.

       (3) The nominee arrives on station.

      (4) The nominee receives his or her appointment letter signed by the Secretary of
Defense (SecDef).

    e. SDO/DATT nominees may serve as the acting SDO/DATT after the criteria in paragraphs
3d(1) through 3d(3) have been met, but before the nominee receives his or her appointment letter
signed by the SecDef. The responsibilities of the acting SDO/DATT are the same as the
responsibilities of the SDO/DATT.

   f. A balanced distribution of SDO/DATT billets by Military Service affiliation, including the
Coast Guard, promotes DoD interests and allows the Services to provide upward progression
within their foreign area officer programs. The apportionment of the SDO/DATT billets by
Service (e.g., Country “A” is assigned to the Navy, Country “B” is assigned to the Army,
Country “C” is assigned to the Air Force) will be approved by the SecDef.

    g. Functions common to the DAO and the SCO will be consolidated to the maximum extent
practical to gain efficiencies, but only if the DAO’s and the SCO’s distinct missions, funding
streams, and information sharing environments can be preserved, potential conflicts of interest
can be avoided, and there is no adverse impact on DAO or SCO missions.




Change 1, 05/22/2017                           2
                                                              DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


   h. Any change to the size, composition, or mandate of the DAO or the SCO will be
coordinated with the Department of State (DOS) and approved by the COM in accordance with
National Security Decision Directive 38 (Reference (g)).

     i. Security cooperation (SC), including security assistance, functions and responsibilities
may be transferred between the SCO and the DAO in accordance with DoD Instruction C-
5105.32 (Reference (h)), DoD Directive 5132.03 (Reference (i)), and DoDI 5132.13 (Reference
(j)), with the concurrence of the GCC and the approval of the Director, Defense Security
Cooperation Agency (DSCA), and the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA).

    j. SDO/DATT billets requiring foreign area officers (FAOs) should be so coded. Whether or
not SDO/DATT billets are so coded, they should be filled when practical by FAOs with prior
security cooperation and attaché experience, consistent with the providing Military Service's
FAO program objectives.

    k. DoD personnel will be selected and trained in accordance with Reference (j) before they
are assigned to an SCO or a DAO to perform SC activities.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directive.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive: is effective December 4, 2013.




                                                Ashton B. Carter
                                                Deputy Secretary of Defense




Change 1, 05/22/2017                            3
                             DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 05/22/2017     4
                                                                 DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


                                           ENCLOSURE 1

                                           REFERENCES


(a)    DoD Directive 5105.75, “Department of Defense Operations at U.S. Embassies,”
       December 21, 2007 (hereby cancelled)
(b)    Section 2321i and subsections 3927(a) and (b) of Title 22, United States Code
(c)    Section 113(b) and Chapter 47 of Title 10, United States Code
(d)    The President’s Letter of Instruction to Chiefs of Mission, May 26, 2009 1
(e)    DoD Directive 5132.12, “Consolidations and Reductions of U.S. Defense Attaché Offices
       (DAOs) and Security Assistance Organizations (SAOs),” October 8, 1991 (hereby
       cancelled)
(f)    DoD Directive 2065.1E, “Assignment of Personnel to United Nations Missions,”
       December 7, 2004
(g)    National Security Decision Directive 38, “Staffing at Diplomatic Missions and Their
       Overseas Constituent Posts,” June 2, 1982
(h)    DoD Instruction C-5105.32, “Defense Attaché System (DAS) (U),” March 18, 2009, as
       amended
(i)    DoD Directive 5132.03, “DoD Policy and Responsibilities Relating to Security
       Cooperation,” December 29, 2016
(j)    DoD Instruction 5132.13, “Staffing of Security Cooperation Organizations (SCOs) and the
       Selection and Training of Security Cooperation Personnel,” January 9, 2009
(k)    DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” December 8,
       1999
(l)    DoD Instruction C-5105.81, “Implementing Instructions for DoD Operations at U.S.
       Embassies (U),” November 6, 2008
(m)    DoD Directive 5105.65, “Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA),” October 26,
       2012
(n)    DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)),” October
       24, 2014, as amended
(o)    DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(p)    DoD Directive 1315.17, “Military Department Foreign Area Officer (FAO) Programs,”
       April 28, 2005
(q)    DoD Instruction 5160.70, “Management of the Defense Language, Regional Expertise, and
       Culture (LREC) Program,” December 30, 2016
(r)    Defense Security Cooperation Agency Manual 5105.38-M, “Security Assistance
       Management Manual,” April 30, 2012 2
(s)    Chairman Joint Chief of Staff Instruction C-5205.01C, “Implementing Instructions for
       Defense Attaché Offices and Security Cooperation Organizations (U),” January 19, 2011
(t)    “Unified Command Plan,” April 6, 2011




1
    Available to authorized users at https://ousdi.osd.mil/key_references/2013.
2
    Available at http://www.dsca.mil/samm/Default.htm.


Change 1, 05/22/2017                              5                         ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(P). Pursuant to DoDD 5111.1 (Reference (k)), the USD(P):

   a. Acts for the SecDef:

       (1) On matters involving DoD elements in U.S. embassies for which the USD(P) is the
principal staff assistant (PSA) and coordinates matters of mutual interest with the USD(I).

       (2) On all SC matters that may be lawfully delegated and serves as the DoD point of
contact and representative for SC.

    b. In coordination with the USD(I), acts as the point of contact for the DOS for all matters
involving DoD presence in and operations at U.S. embassies, except those involving intelligence
or the DAS.

   c. Jointly with the USD(I):

       (1) Recommends the appointment of selected officers by the SecDef to the position of
SDO/DATT on the recommendations of the Director, DSCA, and the Director, DIA, with the
concurrence of the GCC concerned and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS).

       (2) Develops, coordinates, and oversees the implementation of DoD policy and
procedures for the selection, appointment, and performance of SDO/DATTs.

        (3) Assesses the effectiveness of the SDO/DATT model, policy, doctrine, organization,
training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, and facilities and takes appropriate action
to correct any deficiencies.

        (4) Ensures that any change to the size, composition, or mandate of the SDO/DATT
position, the DAO, or the SCO is coordinated with the DOS and approved by the COM in
accordance with Reference (g).

         (5) Provides a SecDef letter of appointment and instruction to the SDO/DATT and a
letter of introduction to the SecDef’s host-nation counterpart introducing the SDO/DATT as the
principal diplomatic representative of the DoD in that country.

       (6) Approves proposals from the GCC concerned to consolidate matters included within
the operational missions of the DAO and the SCO with the concurrence of the Director, DSCA,
the Director, DIA, and the CJCS.

       (7) Reviews and endorses plans for SDO/DATT billet distribution by the Military
Services prior to their submission to the SecDef for approval.



Change 1, 05/22/2017                             6                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013



       (8) Issues DoD instructions, including DoDI C-5105.81 (Reference (l)), DoD
publications, and one-time directive-type memoranda that implement policy, assign
responsibilities, and provide procedures for DoD operations at U.S. embassies.


2. DIRECTOR, DSCA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P) and pursuant
to DoDD 5105.65 (Reference (m)), the Director, DSCA:

   a. Jointly with the Director, DIA:

       (1) Manages the SDO/DATT nomination, selection, and training process. With the
concurrence of the appropriate GCC and the CJCS, forwards nominations with a
recommendation for approval or disapproval to the USD(P) and the USD(I).

        (2) Provides all necessary training to officers selected as the SDO/DATT to function as
the principal DoD representative on the country team responsible for providing coordinated
views on all DoD matters. At a minimum, this training includes:

           (a) Attaché, SC, and personal security training.

           (b) GCC orientations.

           (c) Situational awareness pertinent to counterterrorism operations.

           (d) Consultations and briefings with each of the Military Departments and key OSD
and interagency offices prior to reporting to station.

           (e) Such other training, including language refresher training, as deemed necessary
by the USD(P), the USD(I), the CJCS, the GCC concerned, the Director, DSCA, and the
Director, DIA.

      (3) Reviews proposals to consolidate matters included within the operational missions of
the DAO and the SCO and provides concurrence to the GCC concerned.

       (4) Establishes procedures, in coordination with the Secretaries of the Military
Departments and the GCCs, for the SDO/DATT to execute military-diplomatic representational
responsibilities on behalf of DoD.

      (5) Provides for the issuance of proper credentials and access to information required by
the SDO/DATT.

   b. Approves the establishment and staffing of SCOs in coordination with the GCCs
concerned.

   c. Establishes selection requirements for SCO personnel.



Change 1, 05/22/2017                            7                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013



   d. Sets training requirements for SCO personnel and attachés performing SC duties in
accordance with References (i) and (m).

    e. Collaborates with the CJCS, the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the GCCs
concerned, and the Director, DIA, to distribute SDO/DATT billets by Military Service affiliation
in a manner that best meets DoD requirements.

   f. Provides comments to the GCCs concerned on the performance of SDO/DATTs.


3. USD(I). Pursuant to DoDD 5143.01 (Reference (n)), the USD(I):

   a. Acts for the SecDef:

      (1) On matters involving DoD elements in U.S. embassies for which the USD(I) is the
PSA and coordinates matters of mutual interest with the USD(P) .

       (2) On all intelligence or DAS-related matters in accordance with Reference (h).

    b. In coordination with the USD(P), acts as the point of contact for the Director of National
Intelligence, the Intelligence Community, and the DOS for intelligence or DAS-related matters
involving DoD presence in and operations at U.S. embassies.

   c. Jointly with the USD(P):

       (1) Recommends the appointment of selected officers by the SecDef to the position of
SDO/DATT on the recommendations of the Director, DSCA, and the Director, DIA, with the
concurrence of the GCC concerned and the CJCS.

       (2) Develops, coordinates, and oversees the implementation of DoD policy and
procedures for the selection, appointment, and performance of SDO/DATTs.

        (3) Assesses the effectiveness of the SDO/DATT model, policy, doctrine, organization,
training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, and facilities and takes appropriate action
to correct any deficiencies.

        (4) Ensures that any change to the size, composition, or mandate of the SDO/DATT
position, the DAO, or the SCO is coordinated with the DOS and approved by the COM in
accordance with Reference (g).

         (5) Provides a SecDef letter of appointment and instruction to the SDO/DATT and a
letter of introduction to the SecDef’s host-nation counterpart introducing the SDO/DATT as the
principal diplomatic representative of the DoD.




Change 1, 05/22/2017                             8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


       (6) Approves proposals from the GCC concerned to consolidate matters included within
the operational missions of the DAO and the SCO with the concurrence of the Director, DSCA,
the Director, DIA, and the CJCS.

       (7) Reviews and endorses plans for SDO/DATT billet distribution by the Military
Services prior to their submission to the SecDef for approval.

       (8) Issues DoD Instructions, including DoDI C-5105.81 (Reference (l)), DoD
publications, and one-time directive-type memoranda that implement policy, assign
responsibilities, and provide procedures for DoD operations at U.S. embassies.


4. DIRECTOR, DIA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I) and pursuant to
DoDD 5105.21 (Reference (o)), the Director, DIA:

   a. Jointly with the Director, DSCA:

       (1) Manages the SDO/DATT nomination, selection, and training process. With the
concurrence of the appropriate GCC and the CJCS, forwards nominations with a
recommendation for approval or disapproval to the USD(P) and USD(I).

        (2) Provides all necessary training to officers selected as the SDO/DATT to function as
the principal DoD representative on the country team responsible for providing coordinated
views on all DoD matters. At a minimum, this training includes:

           (a) Attaché, SC, and personal security training.

           (b) GCC orientations.

           (c) Situational awareness pertinent to counterterrorism operations.

           (d) Consultations and briefings with each of the Military Departments and key OSD
and interagency offices prior to reporting to station.

           (e) Such other training, including language refresher training, as deemed necessary
by the USD(P), the USD(I), the GCC concerned, the CJCS, the Director, DSCA, and the
Director, DIA.

      (3) Reviews proposals to consolidate matters included within the operational missions of
the DAO and SCO, and provides concurrence to the GCC concerned.

       (4) Establishes procedures, in coordination with the Secretaries of the Military
Departments and the GCCs concerned, for the SDO/DATT to execute military-diplomatic
representational responsibilities on behalf of DoD.




Change 1, 05/22/2017                            9                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


      (5) Provides for the issuance of proper credentials and access to information required by
the SDO/DATT.

    b. Serves as rater (Army, Air Force, and Marines) or Concurrent Reporting Senior (Navy),
as appropriate, for SDO/DATT military evaluations as provided for by the Secretaries of the
Military Departments.

       (1) This responsibility is not delegable below the Deputy Director.

        (2) The Director, DIA, will process military performance evaluations for SDO/DATTs,
taking into account required inputs and coordination requirements specified by the Military
Service, so as to reach the Service personnel office in a timely manner.

       (3) Coast Guard officers detailed to the DoD and assigned as SDO/DATTs will be rated
in accordance with applicable memorandums of agreement (MOAs).

    c. Collaborates with the CJCS, the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the GCCs
concerned, and the Director, DSCA, to distribute SDO/DATT billets by Military Service
affiliation in a manner that best meets DoD requirements.

   d. Submits a request for diplomatic title for the SDO/DATT through the DOS Title and Rank
Office.


5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). Pursuant to DoD Directive 1315.17 (Reference (p)) and DoDI 5160.70
(Reference (q)), the USD(P&R):

    a. Conducts an annual review of policies and plans to address foreign language and regional
proficiency needs as they relate to SDO/DATTs.

   b. Coordinates FAO utilization policies.

    c. Develops measures of effectiveness to evaluate progress in achieving the goal of increased
language and regional proficiency capabilities throughout the DoD.

   d. Reviews CJCS plans for the distribution of SDO/DATT billets by Military Service.


6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND THE COMMANDANT OF
THE COAST GUARD. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Commandant of
the Coast Guard:

    a. Nominate Service members as SDO/DATTs in response to personnel requisitions that
reflect the authorizations of the DAS or GCC joint manpower plans or joint tables of distribution.




Change 1, 05/22/2017                           10                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


   b. Provide a Service member performance rating scheme that enables both the GCC and the
Director, DIA, to rate the SDO/DATT.

   c. Collaborate with the CJCS, the GCCs concerned, the Director, DSCA, and the Director,
DIA, to distribute SDO/DATT billets by Military Service affiliation in a manner that best meets
DoD requirements.

   d. Should fill SDO/DATT billets with FAOs having prior security cooperation and attaché
experience, consistent with the providing Military Service’s FAO program objectives.

   e. Ensure that DoD personnel are selected and trained in accordance with Reference (j)
before they are assigned to an SCO or a DAO to perform SC activities.


7. CJCS. The CJCS:

   a. Monitors SDO/DATT activities for responsiveness to the requirements of the GCCs
concerned, the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and OSD.

    b. Provides credentials to the CJCS host-nation counterpart, introducing the SDO/DATT as
the principal diplomatic representative of the DoD.

  c. Reviews proposals to consolidate matters included within the operational missions of the
DAO and SCO and provides recommendations to the USD(P) and the USD(I).

    d. Collaborates with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the Commandant of the
Coast Guard, the GCCs concerned, the Director, DSCA, and the Director, DIA, to distribute
SDO/DATT billets by Military Service affiliation in a manner that best meets DoD requirements.
Forwards the resulting distribution plan to the USD(I) and the USD(P) for endorsement prior to
their submission to the SecDef for approval.


8. GCCs. The GCCs concerned:

   a. Review and concur or nonconcur with nominations for SDO/DATT positions.

   b. Serve as Senior Rater (Army), Reporting Senior (Navy), Reviewing Officer (Marine
Corps), or Additional Rater (Air Force), as appropriate, on SDO/DATT military evaluations as
provided for by the Secretaries of the Military Departments.

       (1) This rating responsibility is not delegable below the Deputy Commander.

       (2) Coast Guard officers assigned as SDO/DATTs will be rated in accordance with
applicable MOAs.




Change 1, 05/22/2017                           11                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


    c. Provide orientation briefings for newly assigned SDO/DATTs on items of GCC interest,
including operational policy, intelligence interest, host-nation political-military issues, SC
programs, and representational responsibilities.

    d. In coordination with the USD(I) and with the concurrence of the USD(P), designate a
senior military official, either resident or non-resident, for countries or territories where there is
neither an accredited U.S. attaché nor an SC officer.

    e. When appropriately notified by an SDO/DATT, submit a joint manpower request to the
CJCS in coordination with the COM, the Director, DSCA, and the Director, DIA to establish
authorizations to augment the DAO with personnel supported and funded by SC or security
assistance resources. If the GCC determines, based upon the SDO/DATT’s recommendation,
that the mission would be best served by the establishment of a new SCO, then coordination with
the Director, DSCA is required.

   f. Review proposals to consolidate matters included within the operational missions of the
DAO and SCO, in consultation with the Director, DSCA, the Director, DIA, and the CJCS, and
forward them with a recommendation for approval or disapproval to the USD(P) and the USD(I).

    g. Provide recommendations, in coordination with the CJCS, to the Director, DSCA, and the
Director, DIA on the staffing of DoD personnel assigned to diplomatic missions within their
respective geographic regions.

    h. Collaborate with the CJCS, the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the Commandant
of the Coast Guard, the Director, DSCA, and the Director, DIA, to distribute SDO/DATT billets
by Military Service affiliation in an a manner that best meets DoD requirements.


9. SDO/DATT. The SDO/DATT:

    a. Serves as DATT and chief of the SCO and exercises authority, direction, and control over
the DAO in accordance with Reference (h) and the SCO in accordance with Reference (i). The
SDO/DATT serves under the joint oversight of the GCC concerned, the Director, DSCA, and the
Director, DIA.

    b. Acts as the principal military advisor to the COM concerned on defense issues and
defense aspects of national security issues. This includes planning, coordinating, and supporting
U.S. defense activities in the host nation, including theater SC programs under the oversight of
the GCC.

    c. Acts as the single point of contact for DoD matters involving the embassy or DoD
elements under COM authority, except for the Marine security guard detachment, the force
protection detachment, and naval support units.

    d. Serves as the principal diplomatically accredited U.S. military officer assigned to a U.S.
diplomatic mission and principal embassy liaison with host-nation defense establishments.



Change 1, 05/22/2017                              12                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013



    e. Represents the SecDef and the DoD Components to host-nation counterparts and foreign
diplomats accredited to the host nation, and acts as the principal in-country DoD diplomatic
representative of the SecDef and the DoD Components.

    f. Presents coordinated DoD views on all defense matters to the COM concerned and acts as
the single DoD point of contact to the COM to assist in carrying out the COM’s responsibilities
pursuant to References (b) and (d). Advises the COM regarding COM and Secretary of State
concurrence or approval requirements to carry out specific DoD programs as directed by relevant
legislation, DoD policy, and Presidential directives.

   g. Represents the SecDef and the appropriate GCCs for coordination of administrative and
security matters for all DoD personnel not under the command of a GCC, except for those for
whom the GCC has assumed responsibility pursuant to a GCC-COM MOA.

   h. Performs, supervises, and manages SC responsibilities in accordance with DSCA Manual
5105.38-M (Reference (r)) and specific guidance provided by the Director, DSCA, and the GCC.

    i. Carries out the SDO/DATT’s responsibilities in CJCS Instruction C-5205.01C (Reference
(s)).

    j. Exercises coordinating authority over all DoD elements under COM authority other than
the Marine security guard detachment and naval support units. This authority:

       (1) Will not preempt the authority exercised over these elements by the COM, the
mission authority exercised by the parent DoD Components, or the command authority exercised
by the GCC under the Unified Command Plan (Reference (t)).

         (2) Does not include authority to impose punishment pursuant to chapter 47 of Reference
(c), also known as The Uniform Code of Military Justice.

    k. Upon request, provides information to U.S. Government officials on the general scope of
the activities of all DoD Component elements under the authority of the COM. This includes the
elements’ missions, locations, organization, and unique security requirements.

    l. To the maximum extent practical, and consistent with paragraph 3g above the signature of
this directive:

        (1) Consolidates administration and support functions common to the DAO and SCO
after coordination with the GCC concerned, the Director, DSCA, and the Director, DIA. These
functions include office organization, control of resources and equipment (e.g., motor pool
operations), logistics, training, personnel management other than discipline, and other matters
not included in the operational missions of the DAO and SCO.




Change 1, 05/22/2017                           13                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                            DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


       (2) Forwards proposals for consolidation of matters included within the operational
missions of the DAO and SCO to the GCC concerned for consideration and action in accordance
with paragraph 9f of this enclosure.

       (3) Ensures that proposed changes to the size, composition, or mandate of the DAO or
the SCO are coordinated with the DOS and approved by the COM concerned as required by
Reference (g).

    m. Identifies requirements for SC personnel augmentation based on situations where, over a
6-month period, at least one-half the workload for one or more DAO personnel is devoted to SC
activities. Notifies the GCC concerned of such situations.




Change 1, 05/22/2017                          14                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                          DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


                                         GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


CJCS         Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
COM          chief of mission


DAO          defense attaché office
DAS          defense attaché system
DATT         defense attaché
DIA          Defense Intelligence Agency
DoDD         DoD directive
DoDI         DoD instruction
DOS          Department of State
DSCA         Defense Security Cooperation Agency


FAO          foreign area officer


GCC          geographic Combatant Commander


MOA          memorandum of agreement


PSA          principal staff assistant


SC           security cooperation
SCO          security cooperation organization
SDO/DATT     senior defense official/defense attaché
SecDef       Secretary of Defense


U.S.C.       United States Code
USD(I)       Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)       Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)     Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness




Change 1, 05/22/2017                          15                      GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, the terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

coordinating authority. An individual assigned responsibility for coordinating specific functions
or activities involving forces of two or more Military Departments, two or more joint force
components, or two or more forces of the same Service. The individual has the authority to
require consultation between the agencies involved, but does not have the authority to compel
agreement. In the event that essential agreement cannot be obtained, the matter will be referred
to the next senior in the reporting chain.

DAO. The DoD organization established as part of a U.S. diplomatic mission, through which
the mission of the DAS, operated by the DIA, is accomplished. The SecDef may direct the
assignment or attachment of other military detachments or elements to a DAO. DAO functions
are described in Reference (h).

naval support unit. The naval support unit provides Seabee support to the DOS security program
on a continuing basis. Members of the naval support unit perform security surveillance of
foreign contract construction and perform construction, renovation, maintenance, and repair
work in the secure spaces within the DOS Foreign Service establishments.

security assistance. Group of programs authorized by Reference (b), as amended, and Reference
(i), or other related statutes by which the United States provides defense articles, defense
services, and military education and training by grant, loan, credit, or cash sales in furtherance of
national policies and objectives. Those security assistance programs administered by DoD
through DSCA as delegated by DOS are a subset of security cooperation.

SC. Activities undertaken by DoD to encourage and enable international partners to work with
the United States to achieve strategic objectives. It includes all DoD interactions with foreign
defense and security establishments, including all DoD-administered security assistance
programs, that:

    Build defense and security relationships that promote specific U.S. security interests,
including all international armaments cooperation activities and security assistance activities.

   Develop allied and friendly military capabilities for self-defense and multinational
operations.

   Provide U.S. forces with peacetime and contingency access to host nations.

SCO. All DoD elements permanently located in a foreign country with assigned responsibilities
for carrying out security cooperation or assistance management functions in accordance with
References (b) and (i), and related statutes. It includes military assistance advisory groups,
military missions and groups, offices of defense, military, or security cooperation, liaison groups,
and defense attaché personnel designated to perform security cooperation/assistance functions.
The term “SCO” does not include units, formations, or other ad hoc organizations that conduct



Change 1, 05/22/2017                             16                            GLOSSARY
                                                              DoDD 5205.75, December 4, 2013


security cooperation, including security assistance activities, such as mobile training teams,
mobile education teams, technical assistance field teams, or operational units conducting security
cooperation activities.




Change 1, 05/22/2017                           17                            GLOSSARY
