                             Department of Defense
                                   DIRECTIVE

                                                                         NUMBER 5205.02E
                                                                                 June 20, 2012
                                                       Incorporating Change 2, August 20, 2020

                                                                                      USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:     DoD Operations Security (OPSEC) Program

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5205.02 (Reference (a)) to update established policy and
assigned responsibilities governing the DoD OPSEC program, and incorporate the requirements
of National Security Decision Directive Number 298 (Reference (b)) that apply to the DoD.

    b. Pursuant to Reference (b), establishes the Director, National Security Agency (DIRNSA)
as the Federal Executive Agent (EA) for interagency OPSEC training and assigns responsibility
for maintaining an Interagency OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to the OSD, the Military Departments, the Office
of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant
Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD
(hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that all DoD missions, functions, programs, and activities shall be
protected by an OPSEC program that implements DoD Manual 5205.02 (Reference (c)).

   a. OPSEC shall be considered across the entire spectrum of DoD missions, functions,
programs, and activities. The level of OPSEC to apply is dependent on the threat, vulnerability,
and risk to the assigned mission, function, program, or activity, and available resources.
                                                                  DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012


   b. OPSEC and other security and information operations programs shall be closely
coordinated to account for force protection and the security of information and activities.

   c. DoD personnel shall maintain essential secrecy of information that is useful to adversaries
and potential adversaries to plan, prepare, and conduct military and other operations against the
United States and shall safeguard such information from unauthorized access and disclosure in
accordance with DoD Manual 5200.01 (Reference (d)).

   d. The OPSEC process shall be used to identify and mitigate indicators of U.S. intentions,
capabilities, operations, and activities.

   e. OPSEC countermeasures shall be employed to deny to adversaries and potential
adversaries indicators that reveal critical information about DoD missions and functions.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. INFORMATION COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS. The reporting requirements in this
Directive have been assigned Report Control Symbol DD-INTEL(A)2228 in accordance with
Volume 1 of DoD Manual 8910.01 (Reference (e)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This administrative change corrects paragraph numbering and
updates the title of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) in accordance with Public Law 116-92
(Reference (f)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective June 20, 2012.




                                                 Ashton B. Carter
                                                 Deputy Secretary of Defense
Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 2, 08/20/2020                             2
                                                                DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012


                                        ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5205.02, “DoD Operations Security (OPSEC) Program,” March 6, 2006
      (hereby cancelled)
(b)   National Security Decision Directive Number 298, “National Operations Security
      Program,” January 22, 1988
(c)   DoD 5205.02-M, “DoD Operations Security (OPSEC) Program Manual,”
      November 3, 2008, as amended
(d)   DoD Manual 5200.01, “DoD Information Security Program,” dates vary by volume
(e)   DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
      DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(f)   Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
      December 20, 2019
(g)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Reserve Component Joint Web Risk
      Assessment Cell,” February 12, 1999
(h)   DoD 5220.22-M, “National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM),”
      February 28, 2006, as amended
(i)   Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Strategic Communication and Information
      Operations in the DoD,” January 25, 2011
(j)   DoD Instruction 5200.39, “Critical Program Information (CPI) Identification and
      Protection Within Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E),” May 28,
      2015, as amended
(k)   Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
      Associated Terms,” current edition
(l)   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3213.01C, “Joint Operations Security,”
      July 17, 2008




                                               3
Change 2, 08/20/2020                                                    ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012


                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY
(USD(I&S)). The USD(I&S), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure,
shall:

  a. Establish and oversee the implementation of policies and procedures for the conduct of
DoD OPSEC.

   b. Report annually to the Secretary of Defense on the status of the DoD OPSEC Program.

  c. Coordinate and synchronize OPSEC matters and policies affecting more than one DoD
Component and other Federal agencies.

   d. Develop guidance for conducting OPSEC assessments and surveys.

   e. In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
Logistics (USD(AT&L)), develop standards and procedures for the evaluation and protection,
when necessary, of unclassified and classified contract efforts.

   f. Assign DoD representatives to the IOSS.

    g. In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), and the CJCS, oversee the
establishment and maintenance of a professionally trained and educated OPSEC workforce as
part of information operations (IO) force development.

   h. In accordance with Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (g)), develop
procedures and guidelines to be implemented by the DoD Components for OPSEC reviews of
DoD information shared via Internet-based capabilities.

    i. Establish a training consortium comprised of subject matter experts from the OPSEC
community to identify training requirements; review and update OPSEC curriculum; and
recommend solutions to recognized training issues.


2. DIRNSA. The DIRNSA, under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), in
addition to the tasks in Reference (b) and responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure shall act
as the Federal Executive Agent for interagency OPSEC training, maintain an IOSS to assist
executive departments and agencies, as needed, in establishing OPSEC programs, conducting
OPSEC surveys, providing OPSEC services, and developing and providing interagency OPSEC
training and awareness courses and products.



                                                  4
Change 2, 08/20/2020                                                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012



3. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). The Director, DIA, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11
of this enclosure, shall provide intelligence and counterintelligence threat analysis to support
OPSEC planning to all DoD Components.


4. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE SECURITY SERVICE (DSS). The Director, DSS, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11
of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Verify compliance with OPSEC requirements incorporated in classified contracts during
scheduled security reviews performed under the National Industrial Security Program (NISP) in
accordance with DoD 5220.22-M (Reference (h)). If required, prescribe OPSEC
countermeasures against specific threats for the protection of critical and sensitive information.
On U.S. Government controlled installations, such inspections shall be performed only when the
contractor location is a separately cleared facility under the NISP and the installation commander
requests the security inspection.

    b. In coordination with DoD Components, as necessary, conduct inspections when required.
When requested, coordinate with and assist user agencies in OPSEC surveys of contractors
performing classified contracts and participating in the NISP.


5. USD(P). The USD(P), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. As the Principal Staff Assistant for IO, serve as the principal policy development,
oversight, and coordinating authority for the integration of OPSEC as a warfighting enabler, in
accordance with Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (i)).

   b. Review Combatant Commander operations and plans for OPSEC integration.

   c. In coordination with the USD(I&S), USD(P&R), and CJCS, oversee the establishment
and maintenance of a professionally trained and educated OPSEC workforce as part of IO force
development.


6. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this
enclosure, shall:

    a. Ensure an OPSEC plan is included as a countermeasure in program protection plans for
research, development, and acquisition programs when critical program information has been
identified by the program manager in accordance with DoD Instruction 5200.39 (Reference (j)).

   b. In coordination with the USD(I&S), develop standards and procedures for the evaluation
and protection, when necessary, of unclassified and classified contract efforts.

                                                 5
Change 2, 08/20/2020                                                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012


7. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this
enclosure, shall, in coordination with the USD(I&S), USD(P), and CJCS, oversee the
establishment and maintenance of a professionally trained and educated OPSEC force as part of
IO force development.


8. ASSISTANT TO THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS (ATSD(PA)).
The ATSD(PA), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Develop policy and guidance to ensure OPSEC is incorporated into the public affairs
release of information process.

    b. Coordinate with the USD(I&S) and DIRNSA/CHCSS to ensure specialized OPSEC
training is included in the curriculum for public affairs specialists and officers at the beginner
and advanced levels of training at the Defense Information School.


9. DoD CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (DoD CIO). The DoD CIO, in addition to the
responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall address OPSEC and classification through
compilation of data when developing policies and initiatives regarding information sharing
capabilities that are accessible across the enterprise and shall also develop procedures to mitigate
risks.


10. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY (DISA). In accordance
with Reference (g), the Director, DISA, under the authority, direction, and control of the DoD
CIO and in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall conduct ongoing
OPSEC assessments of Combatant Command, OSD, Defense Agency, and DoD Field Activity
websites.


11. HEADS OF THE DoD AND OSD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD and OSD
Components shall establish OPSEC programs with full-time OPSEC program managers and
coordinators at appropriate command levels to promote an understanding and practice of OPSEC
among all personnel. The Heads of the DoD and OSD Components shall direct that:

    a. OPSEC responsibilities are assigned by commanders and directors to the functional area
of their choice.

   b. Guidance is established for identifying and updating critical information as missions
change.

    c. A process is in place to report to appropriate channels within the Component disclosures
of critical information so that mitigating actions can be implemented.




                                                  6
Change 2, 08/20/2020                                                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012


   d. Dedicated manpower, funding, and resources are available to implement the OPSEC
program. DoD Components will account and plan for resources in accordance with the Planning,
Programming, Budgeting, and Execution System.

    e. Annual OPSEC assessments are conducted. An OPSEC assessment may include program
reviews, Inspector General inspections, or higher headquarters assessments that specifically
address OPSEC.

  f. An annual review and validation of Component OPSEC programs is submitted to the
USD(I&S).

    g. Threat-based comprehensive OPSEC surveys are conducted, at a minimum, every 3 years.
Available automated risk analysis tools that facilitate the OPSEC process should be leveraged to
aid in the identification of vulnerabilities and applicable countermeasures.

        (1) Activities that warrant OPSEC surveys include but are not limited to research,
development, test and evaluation; acquisitions; treaty verification; nonproliferation protocols;
international agreements; force protection operations; special access programs; and activities that
prepare, sustain, or employ Military Services over the range of military operations.

        (2) DoD Components shall identify and prioritize OPSEC survey requirements and
outline procedures for requesting OPSEC survey support from the appropriate organizations.

    h. OPSEC support capabilities are utilized for program development and review, planning,
training, surveys, assessments, and related support, as required.

   i. OPSEC is coordinated and integrated with other U.S. Government agencies, allies, and
coalition partner programs, operations, and activities as appropriate.

   j. In accordance with Reference (c), policies and procedures are established for the review of
unclassified information for OPSEC considerations and data aggregation prior to public release.

    k. The risk of exposure to critical or classified information (alone or through compilation) is
mitigated by providing OPSEC awareness training and guidance to the Component for those
using DoD Internet services, other Internet-based capabilities, emerging technologies, or
developing information sharing environments that are accessible across the enterprise.

    l. OPSEC program managers, coordinators, IO professionals, public affairs personnel,
contracting specialists, and personnel responsible for the review and approval of information
intended for public release have received specialized OPSEC training for their duties in
accordance with Reference (c). The general workforce shall receive OPSEC awareness training
upon initial entry to duty (to include entry to accession programs such as basic training,
commissioning sources, and internships) and annually thereafter.

   m. Guidance is issued to ensure that DoD unclassified and classified contract requirements
properly reflect OPSEC responsibilities and that those responsibilities are included in contracts

                                                 7
Change 2, 08/20/2020                                                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012


when applicable. For classified contracts specifically, in accordance with paragraph 4.a. and 4.b.
of this enclosure, and in coordination with the Director, DSS, ensure adequacy of industrial
security efforts for OPSEC countermeasures outlined in classified contracts that fall under the
NISP.


12. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Establish an OPSEC capability that provides for program development, planning, training,
assessments, surveys, and operational support as required.

   b. Require deploying personnel to complete OPSEC training specific to the operating area.

   c. Direct the establishment of OPSEC working groups at military installations to advise and
support installation operations, threat, and force protection working groups.

   d. In coordination with the Director, DISA, establish and maintain a capability to conduct
ongoing OPSEC assessments of component websites.


13. CJCS. The CJCS, in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. As the joint proponent for OPSEC, oversee contingency planning and operational
integration of OPSEC across the Combatant Commands.

    b. Evaluate and oversee joint OPSEC training to ensure Combatant Command requirements
are met satisfactorily within the joint training system and meet the requirements of a
professionally trained and educated OPSEC workforce as part of IO force development.

   c. Establish and maintain a joint OPSEC support element to provide OPSEC training,
program development and reviews, surveys, assessments, and plans and exercise support to the
Combatant Commands.

   d. Coordinate with the USD(I&S), USD(P), and USD(P&R) for the establishment and
maintenance of a professionally trained and educated force as part of IO force development.


14. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of Combatant
Commands, in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall integrate
OPSEC into all contingency planning and operations and notify the CJCS of OPSEC
requirements.


15. COMMANDERS OF THE GEOGRAPHIC COMBATANT COMMANDS. The
Commanders of the geographic Combatant Commands, in addition to the responsibilities in

                                                8
Change 2, 08/20/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012


sections 11 and 14 of this enclosure, shall develop area specific OPSEC training for deploying
Service members to complete prior to arrival in theater.


16. COMMANDER UNITED STATES SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND (USSOCOM).
The Commander, USSOCOM, in addition to the responsibilities in sections 11 and 14 of this
enclosure, shall:

    a. Establish and maintain an OPSEC support element to provide the command and its
subordinates with program development, planning, training, assessment, survey, and readiness
training tailored to the unique special operations mission.

   b. As a force provider for special operations forces, liaise with geographic Combatant
Commanders and the joint OPSEC support element to ensure preparedness of theater special
operations commands.




                                               9
Change 2, 08/20/2020                                                     ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012


                                             GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ATSD(PA)               Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs

CJCS                   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DIA                    Defense Intelligence Agency
DIRNSA                 Director, National Security Agency
DoD CIO                DoD Chief Information Officer
DoDD                   DoD Directive
DSS                    Defense Security Service

EA                     Executive Agent

IO                     information operations
IOSS                   Interagency OPSEC Support Staff

NISP                   National Industrial Security Program

OPSEC                  operations security

USD(I&S)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
USD(P)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)               Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USSOCOM                United States Special Operations Command


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this Directive.

adversary intelligence systems. Resources and methods available to and used by an adversary
for the collection and exploitation of critical information or indicators thereof. This term and its
definition are approved for inclusion in the next edition of the DoD Dictionary of Military and
Associated Terms (Reference (k)).

countermeasure. Defined in Reference (c).

critical information. Defined in Reference (k).

essential secrecy. Defined in Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3213.01C
(Reference (l)).



                                                  10
Change 2, 08/20/2020                                                           GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDD 5205.02E, June 20, 2012


exploitation. The process of obtaining information from any source and taking advantage of it.

friendly actions. An operation or activity that is carried out by a country, organization, or
individual that is allied to the U.S. military.

indicator. Defined in Reference (c).

OPSEC. A process of identifying critical information and analyzing friendly actions attendant to
military operations and other activities to: identify those actions that can be observed by
adversary intelligence systems; determine indicators and vulnerabilities that adversary
intelligence systems might obtain that could be interpreted or pieced together to derive critical
information in time to be useful to adversaries, and determine which of these represent an
unacceptable risk; then select and execute countermeasures that eliminate the risk to friendly
actions and operations or reduce it to an acceptable level.

OPSEC assessment. An evaluative process of an organization, operation, activity, exercise, or
support function to determine if sufficient countermeasures are in place to protect critical
information. This term and its definition are approved for inclusion in the next edition of
Reference (k).

OPSEC coordinator. An individual trained in OPSEC located at a subordinate level, who works
in coordination with the OPSEC program manager or primary representative.

OPSEC planner. A functional expert trained and qualified to plan and execute OPSEC.

OPSEC process. Defined in Reference (c).

OPSEC program manager. A full-time appointee or primary representative assigned to develop
and manage an OPSEC program.

OPSEC survey. An application of the OPSEC process by a team of subject matter experts to
conduct a detailed analysis of activities associated with a specific organization, operation,
activity, exercise, or support function by employing the known collection capabilities of potential
adversaries. This term and its definition are approved for inclusion in the next edition of
Reference (k).




                                                 11
Change 2, 08/20/2020                                                           GLOSSARY
