                                 Department of Defense
                                  INSTRUCTION
                                                                           NUMBER 5160.24
                                                                               May 8, 2007

                                                                                   USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Delegation of Powers to the Secretaries of the Military Departments to Make
         Determinations Under the Social Security Act and Federal Insurance Contributions
         Act

References: (a) DoD Directive 5160.24, subject as above, April 4, 1957 (hereby canceled)
            (b) Acting Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DoD Directives Review-
                Phase II,” July 13, 2005
            (c) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” October 17, 2006
            (d) Section 405(p) of title 42, United States Code
            (e) Section 3122 of title 26, United States Code


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Instruction:

   1.1. Reissues Reference (a) as a DoD Instruction in accordance with the guidance in
Reference (b) and the authority in Reference (c).

    1.2. Incorporates the Secretary of Defense's delegation to the Secretaries of the Military
Departments to exercise the powers, functions, and duties conferred upon the Secretary of
Defense in References (d) and (e) pertaining to military and civilian personnel within the
cognizance of their respective Departments. The Secretary of Defense retains authority to make
determinations under the Social Security Act for the Department of Defense Agencies and
Activities outside the Military Departments.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to the Secretaries of the Military Departments.


3. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:
                                                                      DoDI 5160.24, May 8, 2007



    3.1. Social Security coverage and taxation will be consistently and efficiently applied within
the Department of Defense.

    3.2. The Secretaries of the Military Departments are directed to comply with the Internal
Revenue Service and Social Security Administration guidance concerning Social Security
coverage and taxation for Federal personnel, including applicable regulations and published
rulings and procedures. The Secretaries of the Military Departments will follow such guidance
in making their determinations under References (d) and (e).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall be responsible for determining which
personnel are covered by Social Security and what amounts of their remuneration are subject to
withholding of Social Security tax.


5. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




                                                2
