                             Department of Defense

                           INSTRUCTION
                                                                         NUMBER 8580.1
                                                                            July 9, 2004



                                                                                   ASD(NII)

SUBJECT: Information Assurance (IA) in the Defense Acquisition System

References: (a) Chapter 25 of title 40, United States Code
            (b) DoD Directive 8500.1, "Information Assurance," October 24, 2002
            (c) DoD Instruction 8500.2, "Information Assurance (IA) Implementation,"
                February 6, 2003
            (d) DoD Directive 5000.1, "The Defense Acquisition System,"
                May 12, 2003
            (e) through (k), see enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction:

     1.1. Implements policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures under
references (a), (b), and (c) necessary to integrate information assurance (IA) into the
Defense Acquisition System described in reference (d) and DoD Instruction 5000.2
(reference (e)).

    1.2. Describes required and recommended levels of IA activities relative to the
acquisition of systems and services.

     1.3. Describes the essential elements of an Acquisition IA Strategy, its applicability,
and prescribes an Acquisition IA Strategy submission and review process.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

This Instruction:

    2.1. Applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the
                                                                  DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the "DoD Components").

     2.2. Applies to all acquisitions of automated information systems (AIS), outsourced
information technology (IT)-based processes, and platforms or weapon systems with IT
interconnections to the Global Information Grid (GIG).


3. DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this Instruction are defined in references (b), (c) and (d), or in enclosure 2.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:

     4.1. IA shall be implemented in all system and services acquisitions at levels
appropriate to the system characteristics and requirements throughout the entire life cycle
of the acquisition.

      4.2. All acquisitions of mission critical or mission essential IT systems, as defined
in reference (e), shall have an adequate and appropriate Acquisition IA Strategy that shall
be reviewed prior to all acquisition milestone decisions, program decision reviews, and
acquisition contract awards.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    5.1. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration
(ASD(NII))/DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO) shall:

         5.1.1. Oversee implementation of this Instruction in coordination with the
Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)).

          5.1.2. Support the USD(AT&L) in developing guidance necessary to integrate
IA into the Defense Acquisition System and the essential elements of an Acquisition IA
Strategy submission and review process.

           5.1.3. Support the Overarching Integrated Product Teams (OIPT) by ensuring
that IA is included for consideration prior to all acquisition milestone decisions, program
decision reviews, and acquisition contract awards.




                                              2
                                                                DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


          5.1.4. Establish and implement procedures for the review of Acquisition IA
Strategies from programs acquiring mission critical or mission essential IT.

     5.2. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
shall:

         5.2.1. Ensure that IA is included for OIPT consideration prior to all acquisition
milestone decisions, program decision reviews, and acquisition contract awards.

          5.2.2. Support the ASD(NII) in overseeing implementation of this Instruction.

          5.2.3. Ensure that detailed procedures and processes for implementing IA in
defense acquisitions and for developing an Acquisition IA Strategy are incorporated in
guidance issued to the defense acquisition workforce.

          5.2.4. Ensure that principles and processes for implementing IA in defense
acquisitions are included in the education and training of the defense acquisition
workforce.

     5.3. The Chairman of the Joint of Chiefs of Staff shall:

          5.3.1. Provide advice and assessment on military capability needs in
accordance with sections 153, 163, and 181 of title 10 U.S.C. (reference (f)). The
Chairman shall present this advice and assessment through validated and approved Joint
Capabilities Integration and Development System documents (see Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff Instructions 3170.01 and 6212 Series (reference (g) and (h))). The
Chairman may engage the DoD Components and Agencies to provide this advice and
assessment.

         5.3.2. Consistent with this Directive, in coordination with the USD(AT&L)
and the ASD(NII), the Chairman may establish procedures to carry out this responsibility.

     5.4. The Director, National Security Agency shall provide support and guidance, as
required, to Program Managers in developing an IA approach, and obtaining information
systems security engineering services, to include describing information protection needs,
defining and designing system security to meet those needs, and assessing the
effectiveness of system security.

     5.5. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

         5.5.1. Ensure that IA is implemented in all system and service acquisitions in
accordance with USD(AT&L) guidance, as issued.

          5.5.2. Establish and implement internal management processes for the
preparation and review of Acquisition IA Strategies at the DoD Component levels.


                                            3
                                                                DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


          5.5.3. Designate a principal point of contact to represent the Component on
policy and procedural matters regarding IA in the acquisition system.

          5.5.4. Establish and implement procedures for the submission and review of
Acquisition IA Strategies from programs acquiring IT other than mission critical or
mission essential IT, as desired.

      5.6. The Program Managers shall ensure that IA is fully integrated into all phases of
their acquisition, upgrade, or modification programs, including initial design,
development, testing, fielding, and operation.


6. PROCEDURES

     6.1. Program Managers and other acquisition officials shall comply with the policy
and procedures of references (b) and (c) for all acquisitions, except where the system or
service being acquired does not utilize any IT, or where the IT component of the system
being acquired consists solely of platform IT with no interconnection to external
information systems or networks.

     6.2. Significant features of compliance include:

          6.2.1. Appointment of an IA Manager.

         6.2.2. Determination of system Mission Assurance Category (MAC) and
Confidentiality Level.

          6.2.3. Identification and implementation of appropriate system Baseline IA
Controls according to enclosure 4 of reference (c).

            6.2.4. Planning and execution of the certification and accreditation process
according to DoD Instruction 5200.40 (reference (i)) and DCI Directive 6/3 (reference
(j)), if applicable.

     6.3. Program Managers shall also provide updated program IA status to OIPTs and
Integrating Integrated Product Teams.

     6.4. Acquisition IA Strategy

           6.4.1. Submission Requirements. Program Managers for acquisitions that
include IT and are designated "Mission Critical" or "Mission Essential" systems as
defined in reference (e), shall prepare and submit an Acquisition IA Strategy addressing
the topics specified in USD(AT&L) IA guidance, as issued. The Heads of the DoD
Components may develop submission requirements for Acquisition IA Strategies for all
other acquisitions as they deem appropriate.


                                             4
                                                             DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


          6.4.2. Review Process. Acquisition IA Strategies for all Acquisition Category
(ACAT) IAM, ACAT IAC, and ACAT ID programs shall be approved by the DoD
Component CIO and submitted to the DoD CIO for review prior to all acquisition
milestone decisions, program decision reviews, and acquisition contract awards. The
Heads of the DoD Components are delegated the authority to conduct reviews of
Acquisition IA Strategies on the behalf of the DoD CIO for all other acquisitions, and
may delegate authority to approve Acquisition IA Strategies. The results of all reviews
shall be documented and retained.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 2
  E1. References, continued
  E2. Definitions




                                             5
                                                          DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


                               E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                             REFERENCES, continued


(e) DoD Instruction 5000.2, "Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,"
    May 12, 2003
(f) Sections 153, 163, and 181 of title 10, United States Code, "Armed Forces"
(g) CJCSI 3170.01, Series, "Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System,"
    current edition
(h) CJCSI 6212.01, Series, "Interoperability and Supportability of Information
    Technology and National Security Systems," current edition
(i) DoD Instruction 5200.40, "DoD Information Technology Security Certification and
    Accreditation Process (DITSCAP)," December 30, 1997
(j) DCI Directive 6/3, "Protecting Sensitive Compartmented Information Within
    Information Systems," June 5, 1999
(k) OMB Circular A-130, "Management of Federal Information Resources, Transmittal
    4," November 30, 2000




                                         6                          ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


                                  E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                                     DEFINITIONS



     E2.1.1. Acquisition Program. A directed, funded effort that provides new,
improved, or continuing materiel, weapon, or information system or service capability in
response to an approved need.

     E2.1.2. Automated Information System (AIS). See DoD Information System.

     E2.1.3. Confidentiality Level. Applicable to DoD information systems, the
confidentiality level is primarily used to establish acceptable access factors, such as
requirements for individual security clearances or background investigations, access
approvals, and need-to-know determinations; interconnection controls and approvals; and
acceptable methods by which users may access the system (e.g., intranet, Internet,
wireless). The Department of Defense has defined three confidentiality levels: classified,
sensitive, and public.

    E2.1.4. Data. Representation of facts, concepts, or instructions in a formalized
manner suitable for communication, interpretation, or processing by humans or by
automatic means. Any representations, such as characters or analog quantities, to which
meaning is or might be assigned.

     E2.1.5. DoD Information System. Set of information resources organized for the
collection, storage, processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, disposition,
display, or transmission of information. Includes AIS applications, enclaves, outsourced
IT-based processes, and platform IT interconnections.

           E2.1.5.1. Automated Information System (AIS) Application. For DoD IA
purposes, an AIS application is the product or deliverable of an acquisition program such
as those described in reference (d). An AIS application performs clearly defined
functions for which there are readily identifiable security considerations and needs that
are addressed as part of the acquisition. An AIS application may be a single software
application (e.g., Integrated Consumable Items Support); multiple software applications
that are related to a single mission (e.g., payroll or personnel); or a combination of
software and hardware performing a specific support function across a range of missions
(e.g., Global Command and Control System, Defense Messaging System). AIS
applications are deployed to enclaves for operations, and have their operational security
needs assumed by the enclave. Note: An AIS application is analogous to a "major
application" as defined in OMB A-130 (reference (k)); however, this term is not used in
order to avoid confusion with the DoD acquisition category of Major Automated
Information System (MAIS).



                                            7                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


          E2.1.5.2. Enclave. Collection of computing environments connected by one or
more internal networks under the control of a single authority and security policy,
including personnel and physical security. Enclaves always assume the highest Mission
Assurance Category and security classification of the AIS applications or outsourced IT-
based processes they support, and derive their security needs from those systems. They
provide standard IA capabilities such as boundary defense, incident detection and
response, and key management, and also deliver common applications, such as office
automation and electronic mail. Enclaves are analogous to general support systems, as
defined in reference (k). Enclaves may be specific to an organization or a mission, and
the computing environments may be organized by physical proximity or by function
independent of location. Examples of enclaves include local area networks and the
applications they host, backbone networks, and data processing centers.

          E2.1.5.3. Outsourced IT-based Process. For DoD IA purposes, an outsourced
IT-based process is a general term used to refer to outsourced business processes
supported by private sector information systems, outsourced information technologies, or
outsourced information services. An outsourced IT-based process performs clearly
defined functions for which there are readily identifiable security considerations and
needs that are addressed in both acquisition and operations.

          E2.1.5.4. Platform IT Interconnection. For DoD IA purposes, platform IT
interconnection refers to network access to platform IT. Platform IT interconnection has
readily identifiable security considerations and needs that must be addressed in both
acquisition and operations. Platform IT refers to computer resources, both hardware and
software, that are physically part of, dedicated to, or essential in real time to the mission
performance of special purpose systems, such as weapons, training simulators, diagnostic
test and maintenance equipment, calibration equipment, equipment used in the research
and development of weapons systems, medical technologies, transport vehicles,
buildings, and utility distribution systems such as water and electric. Examples of
platform IT interconnections that impose security considerations include communications
interfaces for data exchanges with enclaves for mission planning or execution, remote
administration, and remote upgrade or reconfiguration.

     E2.1.6. DoD Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation
Process (DITSCAP). The standard DoD process for identifying information security
requirements, providing security solutions, and managing information system security
activities.

     E2.1.7. Enclave. See DoD Information System.

     E2.1.8. Global Information Grid (GIG). Globally interconnected, end-to-end set of
information capabilities, associated processes, and personnel for collecting, processing,
storing, disseminating, and managing information on demand to warfighters, policy
makers, and support personnel. The GIG includes all owned and leased communications
and computing systems and services, software (including applications), data, security


                                              8                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


services, and other associated services necessary to achieve Information Superiority. It
also includes National Security Systems as defined in reference (a). The GIG supports all
DoD, National Security, and related Intelligence Community (IC) missions and functions
(strategic, operational, tactical, and business) in war and in peace. The GIG provides
capabilities from all operating locations (bases, posts, camps, stations, facilities, mobile
platforms, and deployed sites). The GIG provides interfaces to coalition, allied, and non-
DoD users and systems. Non-GIG IT is stand-alone, self-contained, or embedded IT that
is not or shall not be connected to the enterprise network. The GIG includes any system,
equipment, software, or service that meets one or more of the following criteria:

          E2.1.8.1. Transmits information to, receives information from, routes
information among, or interchanges information among other equipment, software, and
services.

          E2.1.8.2. Provides retention, organization, visualization, information
assurance, or disposition of data, information, and/or knowledge received from or
transmitted to other equipment, software, and services.

          E2.1.8.3. Processes data or information for use by other equipment, software,
and services.

     E2.1.9. IA Control. An objective IA condition of integrity, availability or
confidentiality achieved through the application of specific safeguards or through the
regulation of specific activities that is expressed in a specified format (i.e., a control
number, a control name, control text, and a control class). Specific management,
personnel, operational, and technical controls are applied to each DoD information
system to achieve an appropriate level of integrity, availability, and confidentiality in
accordance with reference (k).

     E2.1.10. Information. Any communication or representation of knowledge, such as
facts, data, or opinion in any medium or form, including textual, numerical, graphic,
cartographic, narrative, or audiovisual forms.

     E2.1.11. Information Assurance (IA). Measures that protect and defend
information and information systems by ensuring their availability, integrity,
authentication, confidentiality, and non-repudiation. This includes providing for the
restoration of information systems by incorporating protection, detection, and reaction
capabilities.

     E2.1.12. Information Technology (IT). Any equipment or interconnected system or
subsystem of equipment that is used in the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation,
management, movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission or
reception of data or information by the DoD Component. For purposes of the preceding
sentence, equipment is used by a DoD Component if the equipment is used by the DoD



                                              9                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


Component directly or is used by a contractor under a contract with the DoD Component
that requires the following:

          E2.1.12.1. The use of such equipment; or

          E2.1.12.2. The use, to a significant extent, of such equipment in the
performance of a service or the furnishing of a product. The term "information
technology" includes computers, ancillary equipment, software, firmware and similar
procedures, services (including support services), and related resources. Notwithstanding
the above, the term "information technology" does not include any equipment that is
acquired by a Federal contractor incidental to a Federal contract.

     E2.1.13. Major Automated Information System (MAIS). An acquisition program
where the dollar value estimated by the DoD Component Head is to require program
costs (all appropriations) in any single year in excess of $32 million in fiscal year (FY)
2000 constant dollars, total program costs in excess of $126 million in FY 2000 constant
dollars, or total life-cycle costs in excess of $378 million in FY 2000 constant dollars, or
Milestone Decision Authority designation as special interest.

     E2.1.14. Mission Assurance Category (MAC). Applicable to DoD information
systems, the mission assurance category reflects the importance of information relative to
the achievement of DoD goals and objectives, particularly the warfighters' combat
mission. Mission assurance categories are primarily used to determine the requirements
for availability and integrity. The Department of Defense has three defined mission
assurance categories:

          E2.1.14.1. Mission Assurance Category I (MAC I). Systems handling
information that is determined to be vital to the operational readiness or mission
effectiveness of deployed and contingency forces in terms of both content and
timeliness. The consequences of loss of integrity or availability of a MAC I system are
unacceptable and could include the immediate and sustained loss of mission
effectiveness. MAC I systems require the most stringent protection measures.

          E2.1.14.2. Mission Assurance Category II (MAC II). Systems handling
information that is important to the support of deployed and contingency forces. The
consequences of loss of integrity are unacceptable. Loss of availability is difficult to deal
with and can only be tolerated for a short time. The consequences could include delay or
degradation in providing important support services or commodities that may seriously
impact mission effectiveness or operational readiness. MAC II systems require
additional safeguards beyond best practices to ensure adequate assurance.

          E2.1.14.3. Mission Assurance Category III (MAC III). Systems handling
information that is necessary for the conduct of day-to-day business, but does not
materially affect support to deployed or contingency forces in the short-term. The
consequences of loss of integrity or availability can be tolerated or overcome without


                                             10                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 8580.1, July 9, 2004


significant impacts on mission effectiveness or operational readiness. The consequences
could include the delay or degradation of services or commodities enabling routine
activities. MAC III systems require protective measures, techniques, or procedures
generally commensurate with commercial best practices.

     E2.1.15. Mission Critical Information System. A system that meets the definitions
of "information system" and "national security system" in reference (a), the loss of which
would cause the stoppage of warfighter operations or direct mission support of warfighter
operations. (Note: The designation of mission critical shall be made by a Component
Head, a Combatant Commander, or their designee. A financial management IT system
shall be considered a mission-critical IT system as defined by the USD(Comptroller).
A "Mission-Critical Information Technology System" has the same meaning as a
"Mission-Critical Information System.")

     E2.1.16. Mission Essential Information System. A system that meets the definition
of "information system" in reference (a), that the acquiring Component Head or designee
determines is basic and necessary for the accomplishment of the organizational mission.
(Note: The designation of mission essential shall be made by a Component Head, a
Combatant Commander, or their designee. A financial management IT system shall be
considered a mission-essential IT system as defined by the USD(Comptroller).
A "Mission-Essential Information Technology System" has the same meaning as a
"Mission-Essential Information System.")

     E2.1.17. Outsourced IT-based Process. See DoD Information System.

     E2.1.18. Platform IT Interconnection. See DoD Information System.

     E2.1.19. Program Manager (PM). The designated individual with responsibility for
and authority to accomplish program objectives for development, production, and
sustainment to meet the user's operational needs. The PM shall be accountable for
credible cost, schedule, and performance reporting to the Milestone Decision Authority.

      E2.1.20. Weapon(s) System. A combination of one or more weapons with all
related equipment, materials, services, personnel, and means of delivery and deployment
(if applicable) required for self-sufficiency.




                                           11                            ENCLOSURE 2
