                           Department of Defense
                                   DIRECTIVE
                                                                           NUMBER 5105.62
                                                                                April 24, 2013
                                                    Incorporating Change 1, November 10, 2015

                                                                                          DCMO

SUBJECT:      Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by Title 10, United
States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (a)), this directive reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5105.62
(Reference (b)) to update the mission, organization and management, responsibilities and
functions, relationships, authorities, and administration of DTRA.


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands
(CCMDs), the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred
to collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).


3. MISSION

   a. The mission of DTRA is to safeguard the United States and its allies from weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) threats globally.

    b. DTRA has a unique role in DoD efforts regarding countering weapons of mass destruction
(CWMD), and supports a broad range of activities across the CWMD mission. DTRA provides
integrated technical and operational solutions, as well as intellectual capital, to inform and
support both DoD and national-level policies and strategies to address WMD threats to the
homeland as well as to the warfighter. As such, DTRA supports the CWMD activities of the
U.S. Government (USG) and its allies at the nexus between WMD and terrorism.


4. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT
                                                                    DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


   a. DTRA is a Defense Agency, in accordance with sections 191 and 192 of Reference (a),
under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)), through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense Programs (ASD(NCB)), consistent with DoDD
5134.01 (Reference (c)) and DoDD 5134.08 (Reference (d)).

    b. DTRA is a combat support agency (CSA), in accordance with section 193 of Reference
(a) and DoDD 3000.06 (Reference (e)).

   c. DTRA consists of a Director, a Deputy Director, an Executive Director, and subordinate
organizational elements established by the Director within resources assigned by the Secretary of
Defense.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS. The Director, DTRA:

   a. Organizes, directs, and manages DTRA and all assigned resources.

    b. In accordance with Reference (e), executes those responsibilities applicable to DTRA’s
designation as a CSA.

    c. Accomplishes planning, programming, budgeting, and execution (PPBE), accounting, and
financial management activities for DTRA, in accordance with established DoD policies and
procedures.

   d. Integrates assigned CWMD activities and tasks across the DoD, as appropriate. In this
capacity, the Director:

        (1) Supports the Commander, United States Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM), as
the lead Combatant Commander (CCDR) for synchronizing DoD efforts to combat WMD in
accordance with the Unified Command Plan (Reference (f)), leveraging DTRA’s planning,
technical development, capabilities and needs identification, and operational expertise and
capabilities required to execute CWMD operations.

        (2) Serves as the Director of the United States Strategic Command Center for Combating
Weapons of Mass Destruction (SCC-WMD), over which the Commander, USSTRATCOM, has
direct tasking authority.

      (3) Provides technical and operational support to the Commander, Standing Joint Force
Headquarters for Elimination.

       (4) Provides technical subject matter expertise and supports SCC-WMD Proliferation
Security Initiative activities, consistent with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction
(CJCSI) 3520.02B (Reference (g)).




Change 1, 11/10/2015                          2
                                                                     DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


        (5) Manages and oversees DTRA research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E)
and acquisition needed to support DoD mission areas in support of DoDD 2060.02 (Reference
(h)). This includes support of OSD strategic and tactical systems acquisition oversight of DoD
major defense acquisition program (MDAP), pre-MDAP, and development programs, and as
stated in DoD CWMD joint experimentation initiatives.

        (6) Assists the ASD(NCB) to develop a comprehensive research, development, and
acquisition strategy to combat WMD, consistent with References (d) and (h), and in support of
DoDD 5160.05E (Reference (i)).

      (7) Provides technical, operational, and acquisition support, advice, and
recommendations, as appropriate, to the other DoD Components in all assigned mission areas.

      (8) Manages and operates the Defense Threat Reduction University, including the
Defense Nuclear Weapons School.

       (9) Provides the DoD with a manned 24-hours a day/7-days a week globally responsive
CWMD operations center, technical reachback, and chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear,
and high-yield explosives (CBRNE) decision support system with capability for planning,
operations, and post-event analysis. This system assists the USG and facilitates information
sharing with federal, State, and local agencies, consistent with Executive Order 13388
(Reference (j)) and CJCSI 3125.01C (Reference (k)).

        (10) Serves as the DoD representative, or supports DoD representatives, in interagency,
bilateral, and multilateral committees and processes involving matters relating to the DTRA
mission, as appropriate.

         (11) Assesses current and future WMD threats and assists the other DoD Components,
USG agencies, and organizations in anticipating the future strategic environment so that
programs, plans, strategies, and technologies can prepare warfighters to defeat or mitigate these
threats.

       (12) Provides analytical, research, and administrative support to federal advisory
committees as directed, to include the Threat Reduction Advisory Committee, the Veterans’
Advisory Board on Dose Reconstruction, and their respective subcommittees, panels, working
groups, and task forces, as required.

   e. Supports DoD efforts to implement the key objectives of U.S. nuclear weapons posture
and policy. Provides operational and technical support to prevent nuclear proliferation and
nuclear terrorism; maintain strategic stability at reduced nuclear force levels; and sustain a safe,
secure, and effective nuclear arsenal. In this capacity, the Director:

       (1) Preserves critical nuclear competencies through their use in other mission areas of
DTRA and by other means; coordinates and collaborates with the other DoD Components and
the Department of Energy (DOE) on stockpile stewardship; and maintains the capability to




Change 1, 11/10/2015                          3
                                                                    DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


support coordination of strategic system sustainment, consistent with Presidential Decision
Directive 15 (Reference (l)).

       (2) Maintains the national nuclear weapon stockpile databases and provides surveillance,
guidance, coordination, advice, and assistance, as appropriate, concerning all nuclear weapons in
DoD custody.

         (3) Provides technical assistance and support to the other DoD Components for
developing and publishing standards, requirements, and operational procedures dealing with the
reliability, safety, security, control, logistics management, and explosive ordnance disposal of
nuclear weapons or devices.

       (4) Provides support for OSD activities on nuclear weapon matters, as requested,
including:

           (a) Nuclear weapons safety, security, control, reliability, and survivability.

          (b) Joint DoD-DOE nuclear weapons life-cycle activities, in accordance with DoDD
3150.1 (Reference (m)).

         (c) Activities of the Nuclear Weapons Council (NWC), including meetings of the
NWC and its Standing and Safety Committee.

           (d) Activities of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, including meetings of the
Nuclear Planning Group - High-Level Working Group, and the Joint Theater Surety
Management Group.

           (e) Preparation and coordination of required documentation.

           (f) Support for international military atomic energy programs.

       (5) Conducts Defense Nuclear Surety Inspection Oversights (DNSIO), Defense Nuclear
Surety Monitor Inspections (DNSMI), and nuclear weapons technical inspection (NWTI)
inspector training on behalf of the CJCS.

           (a) At the direction of the CJCS, conducts DNSIO of Military Department NWTI
teams at the units responsible for assembly, maintenance, and storage of nuclear weapons
systems and components.

           (b) Develops a NWTI inspector course and conducts inspector training covering
inspection policy and procedures that will incorporate best practices and lessons learned from the
Military Departments. All new NWTI inspectors will be required to complete this training
successfully.

           (c) Conducts DNSMI to observe and evaluate a limited number of CJCS-directed
nuclear surety tasks or exercises to address areas of concern.



Change 1, 11/10/2015                         4
                                                                   DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013



        (6) Provides RDT&E support to OSD and the Military Departments for nuclear weapons
physical security, including force-on-force tests to examine DoD policies on nuclear physical
security.

       (7) Provides organizational support to the Joint Atomic Information Exchange Group in
cooperation with the DOE, in accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5030.14 (Reference (n)).

       (8) Researches and develops:

           (a) Hardening technologies for strategic systems.

           (b) The effects of, and methodologies to address, nuclear weapons.

           (c) Technologies to maintain readiness to conduct effects experiments, including
those needed if underground nuclear weapons testing is resumed.

       (9) Provides technical support and RTD&E to support nuclear employment planning,
including nuclear weapons effects and consequences of execution modeling.

   f. Provides support to DoD nonproliferation tasks and activities. In this capacity, the
Director:

        (1) Implements the Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) Program according to guidance
from the USD(AT&L), through the ASD(NCB), and the policies established by the Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Homeland Defense and Global Security (ASD(HD&GS)), in accordance with Reference (h) and
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (o)), and consistent with applicable CTR
policies, agreements, international arms control agreements, and regimes. As such, the Director:

         (a) Develops long-term implementation strategies, program plans, and budgets for
the DoD CTR Program.

            (b) Develops technical requirements jointly with the ministries and agencies of the
recipient states.

           (c) Manages the performance, cost, and schedule of CTR projects.

       (2) Serves as the DoD focal point for implementation of inspection, escort, and
monitoring provisions of arms control treaties and other agreements, consistent with DoDD
2060.1 (Reference (p)). As such, the Director:

            (a) Serves as the DoD lead responsible for treaty-verification monitoring technology
development, operation of treaty-specified monitoring facilities, and general technical support of
arms-control initiatives. Performs data collection, compilation, and integration for arms control
treaties and agreements.



Change 1, 11/10/2015                        5
                                                                    DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013



             (b) Provides, conducts, and manages training for on-site inspections and aerial
monitoring by the USG abroad, in accordance with arms-control agreements and confidence- and
security-building measures. Performs activities associated with the conduct of on-site
inspections and aerial monitoring by foreign inspectors on U.S. facilities and at U.S.-controlled
facilities in foreign countries, in coordination with and in support of the geographic combatant
commands, the Military Departments, and facility commanders.

         (c) Manages the DoD Treaty Inspection Readiness Program, in accordance with
DoDI 5205.10 (Reference (q)).

           (d) Provides support for related activities of U.S. arms control treaty and/or
agreement delegations, OSD officials, and the other DoD Components, as requested by
appropriate officials, and provide staff support, as agreed, to the designated OSD treaty
managers.

           (e) Provides support for coordination and cooperation with foreign parties and/or
international bodies to accomplish treaty and/or agreement objectives, including providing
personnel and logistics resources to intra-alliance and international operations, as directed.

       (3) Supports the Defense Security Cooperation Agency Enhanced End Use Monitoring
(EEUM) Program, on a case-by-case basis, through the conduct of EEUM inspections of selected
U.S.-origin defense articles transferred to foreign nations and/or the facilities used to store the
defense articles.

       (4) Provides security advisors, as requested, to the other DoD Components and other
USG departments and agencies having cognizance over special access programs, in the direction,
management, and coordination of arms control policy development, oversight, and
implementation initiatives potentially affecting the special access program community,
consistent with DoDD 5205.07 (Reference (r)).

        (5) Supports the Department of State and the CCDRs in efforts to assist foreign countries
in improving the safety, security, and accountability of shoulder-fired anti-aircraft missiles, small
arms, light weapons, and ammunition.

    g. Provides support for DoD CWMD tasks and related activities to characterize, deter,
interdict, defeat, prevent, respond to, and defend against CBRNE threats. In this capacity, the
Director:

       (1) Provides operational and technical subject matter expertise and support to the CJCS
and the Secretaries of the Military Departments for CBRNE doctrine, training, readiness, and
modeling and simulation.

       (2) Provides other DoD Components with the capabilities (training, technology, and
advice) to:




Change 1, 11/10/2015                          6
                                                                    DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


          (a) Prevent, deter, detect, locate, characterize, track, defeat, and mitigate existing or
future CBRNE threats or devices.

           (b) Manage RDT&E programs to enhance and transition CWMD capabilities.

           (c) Address new and emerging CBRNE threats or devices.

        (3) Implements DoD/Federal Bureau of Investigation and DoD/Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) International Counterproliferation Programs worldwide, consistent with sections
2333 and 2334 of Title 50, U.S.C. (Reference (s)), to deter the possible proliferation and
acquisition of WMD across international borders.

       (4) Conducts pre-incident site surveys and provides site characteristic packages to
supported agencies to aid in crisis or consequence planning.

       (5) Evaluates the lethality and collateral effects of the potential use of WMD against a
broad spectrum of U.S. interests in warfighting and terrorist scenarios.

        (6) Researches, develops, and evaluates advanced weapons and their lethal or collateral
effects, including analysis of delivery options and weapon/target interaction, against the
spectrum of WMD-related targets.

      (7) Assesses, models, enhances, and tests the survivability and operability of
components, systems, forces, and infrastructure to the effects of nuclear weapons and other
WMD, consistent with guidance provided by DoDI 3150.09 (Reference (t)).

        (8) Serves as the DoD focal point for the development, demonstration, and fabrication of
radiation-resistant microelectronics, components, materials, and optics to achieve hardening
standards and integration into systems.

        (9) Develops and manages a holistic chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
threat detection portfolio that integrates passive, active, and alternative detection approaches to
safeguard DoD capabilities and interests from WMD, to support both counterproliferation (CP)
and weapons of mass destruction terrorism (WMD-T) efforts.

       (10) In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, identifies and
supports the experimental capabilities necessary to conduct CWMD RDT&E activities across
DoD laboratories, interagency laboratories, and industry.

       (11) Manages DoD national technical nuclear forensics (NTNF) research and
development (R&D) programs, in accordance with DoDD S-2060.04 (Reference (u)).
Coordinates NTNF R&D programs with the Secretary of the Air Force and other DoD and non-
DoD NTNF-relevant R&D activities.

       (12) Manages the development of CP-related mission area technologies to:




Change 1, 11/10/2015                          7
                                                                    DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


           (a) Assist other DoD Components in performing CP R&D and conduct CP rapid
acquisition programs (e.g., to support joint urgent operational needs), joint capability technology
demonstrations, and advanced technology demonstrations.

           (b) Support and execute interagency CP programs, in accordance with DoD policies.

          (c) Support the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering
(ASD(R&E)), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), to execute the
Hard and Deeply Buried Target Defeat Science and Technology (S&T) Master Plan.

            (d) Support the United States Special Operations Command to develop capabilities to
conduct its CP and WMD-T missions.

           (e) Support the Intelligence Community to locate, characterize, and assess hard and
deeply buried targets and underground facilities. Provide targeting assistance to the other DoD
Components, as requested.

      (13) Provides support for the ASD(NCB) to fulfill responsibilities to the
Counterproliferation Program Review Committee.

        (14) Provides operational and analytical support to the other DoD Components and other
organizations for mission assurance, critical infrastructure protection, antiterrorism, and/or force
protection. As such, the Director:

           (a) Serves as the technical and field agent on force protection, within assigned areas
of cognizance, for the CJCS. Such areas may include, but are not limited to:

             1. Vulnerability assessments, in accordance with DoDI 3020.52 (Reference (v)),
DoDI 2000.12 (Reference (w)), and DoDI 2000.16 (Reference (x)).

               2. Technology development.

               3. Training.

            (b) Conducts balanced survivability assessments (BSAs) of U.S. and allied systems
against a broad spectrum of threat environments, including architectural analyses to identify
systemic problems in strategic systems, consistent with DoDI O-3000.08 (Reference (y)).

          (c) Coordinates with the Joint Staff Deputy Directorate for Antiterrorism and
Homeland Defense as the central scheduling activity for all Joint Staff integrated vulnerability
assessments (JSIVAs), BSAs, and antiterrorism mobile training teams.

            (d) Coordinates with the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence -
Security Directorate to share results from JSIVAs, BSAs, vulnerability assessments, and
exercises, in furtherance of the purposes stated in DoDI 5200.08 (Reference (z)).




Change 1, 11/10/2015                         8
                                                                   DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


       (15) Assists in WMD elimination or proliferation prevention.

        (16) Performs analytical studies on matters related to force operability and survivability
against the spectrum of nuclear and other CBRNE threats.

       (17) Manages and integrates the chemical and biological (CB) defense S&T programs,
under the oversight of the ASD(NCB), consistent with Reference (i) to:

           (a) Develop, coordinate, integrate, execute, and transition DoD CB S&T medical and
nonmedical programs in response to Joint Requirements Office for Chemical, Biological,
Radiological, and Nuclear Defense requirements, the Joint Program Executive Office for
Chemical Biological Defense programs, and Chemical and Biological Defense Program Test and
Evaluation technology needs.

           (b) Provide PPBE process actions, as necessary, for CB S&T programs under the
oversight of the ASD(NCB).

           (c) Conduct CB S&T liaison with other USG agencies, as appropriate.

           (d) Manage CB small business innovative research programs conducted by the
Military Departments.

           (e) Support DoD CB S&T international efforts, as required.

           (f) Coordinate CB S&T efforts with other DoD organizations, including research and
engineering activities and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

      (18) Exercises funds management responsibilities for that portion of the CB Defense
Program under the oversight of the ASD(NCB), consistent with Reference (i).

    h. Provides support to DoD consequence management (CM) tasks and related activities. In
this capacity, the Director:

     (1) Conducts RDT&E programs and provides technical support to the other DoD
Components and other organizations, as appropriate, in areas related to CM.

       (2) Provides emergency response support, including training exercises, CBRNE advisory
teams, and operational planning assistance for matters involving CBRNE events.

       (3) Serves as the DoD lead for nuclear and radiological incident preparedness training
and exercises, in accordance with DoDD 3150.08 (Reference (aa)).

        (4) Provides operational and technical expertise to WMD attack attribution and supports
the viability of attribution capabilities.




Change 1, 11/10/2015                         9
                                                                    DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


       (5) In coordination with the ASD(HD&GS), under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(P) and consistent with Reference (o) and DoDD 5111.18 (Reference (ab)), provides
support to USG foreign consequence management (FCM) operations, in accordance with DoDI
2000.21 (Reference (ac)). In support of FCM operations, the Director:

            (a) Provides FCM program management, including functional assistance and
training, as appropriate, for DoD FCM exercises, as requested by the geographic Combatant
Commanders (GCCs).

           (b) Advises and supports FCM training and operational deployments of DoD
elements in response to CBRNE incidents, as requested.

            (c) Establishes and maintains deployable technical capabilities for advising and
assisting the GCCs in the event of a foreign CBRNE incident.

       (6) In coordination with ASD(HD&GS), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P) and consistent with Reference (o) and DoDD 5111.13 (Reference (ad)), in support of the
DHS, serves as the Interagency Modeling Atmospheric and Assessment Center (IMAAC)
Technical Operations Hub responsible for producing, coordinating, and disseminating
consequence predictions for atmospheric release incidents for the Federal Government. In
support of DHS, IMAAC:

            (a) Provides 24/7 on-site scientific support, continuity of operations capability, and
classified modeling capability.

            (b) Supports the IMAAC through participation in planned and unplanned events in
support of federal, State, local, and tribal responders as appropriate and authorized by law.

            (c) Supports, within available authorities, the development and implementation of a
set of standard IMAAC products, capitalizing on federal expertise, tools, and data for
atmospheric transport and diffusion modeling related to CBRNE events.

           (d) Supports, within available authorities, R&D to improve federal modeling and
assessment capabilities. Also, supports existing standards and guidelines, and as required, the
development of new or improved National standards, guidelines, and protocols for model
Verification, Validation, and Accreditation for IMAAC use.

            (e) Facilitates the use of existing and future communications systems for the rapid
distribution of predictions to federal, State, local, and tribal responders.

           (f) Supports the IMAAC in conducting after-action reviews to capture best practices
and lessons learned.

   i. Supports DoD collaboration with departments and agencies across the USG to enhance the
capacity of other nations to counter WMD.




Change 1, 11/10/2015                         10
                                                                    DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


   j. On behalf of the Commander, USSTRATCOM, provides, hosts, and maintains a central
repository listing of USG CWMD capabilities, assets, and units capable of supporting CWMD
operations.

   k. Manages the Nuclear Test Personnel Review Program.

   l. Represents or supports the USD(AT&L) and the ASD(NCB) in departmental processes
involving matters relating to the DTRA CWMD mission.

   m. Designs and manages DTRA programs and activities to:

       (1) Improve standards of performance, economy, and efficiency.

        (2) Demonstrate DTRA’s attention to the requirements of its organizational customers,
both internal and external to the DoD, consistent with the requirements of the Secretary of
Defense Biennial Review of Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities.

    n. Supports general OSD requirements for analytic support to enable more effective
planning, programming, and operations in dealing with the WMD challenges of the 21st century.
Participates in a collaborative program of research and analysis, backed up by strategic dialogues
with key international partners of interest to the DoD, that also enables full and effective use of a
broad range of analytic sources, including those in both the academic and federally funded
research and development center communities.

   o. Performs such other duties as may be assigned by the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy
Secretary of Defense, the USD(AT&L), or the ASD(NCB).


6. RELATIONSHIPS

   a. In the performance of assigned responsibilities and functions, the Director, DTRA:

       (1) Reports directly to the ASD(NCB).

      (2) Uses existing systems, facilities, and services of the DoD and other federal agencies,
when possible, to avoid duplication and to achieve maximum efficiency and economy.

       (3) Is responsive to the CJCS for combat support and other related activities, as
appropriate. For these purposes, the CJCS is authorized to communicate directly with the
Director, DTRA, and may task the Director, DTRA, to the extent coordinated with the
USD(AT&L) and the ASD(NCB).

      (4) Coordinates and exchanges information with the other DoD Component heads and
the OSD Principal Staff Assistants having collateral or related responsibilities and functions.




Change 1, 11/10/2015                         11
                                                                  DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


       (5) Coordinates with relevant CCMDs and USG agencies regarding implementation of
approved CTR Program activities and/or projects.

       (6) Supports and/or represents the DoD on U.S. arms control treaty and/or agreement
delegations, CWMD program activities, and bilateral and multinational processes, as appropriate.
For these purposes, the USD(P) may communicate directly with the Director, DTRA.

        (7) Coordinates and exchanges information with and provides support to the U.S.
Intelligence Community, other government organizations, and Executive departments and
agencies that have collateral or an interest in the conduct of DTRA functions and/or CWMD-
related functions.

   b. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), the ASD(NCB):

     (1) Coordinates with the USD(P) and provides access to the interagency relating to the
DTRA CWMD mission.

       (2) Coordinates with the USD(P) for matters related, but not limited to:

           (a) Sustainment of and support for the U.S. nuclear deterrent.

           (b) Programs and activities of the DoD CTR Program.

            (c) Support to arms control treaty and/or agreement delegations and implementation
of relevant arms control treaties/agreements.

           (d) Oversight of the DoD/Federal Bureau of Investigation and DoD/DHS
International Counterproliferation Program.

           (e) Other CWMD engagement with international partners.

   c. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L) and consistent with DoDD
5134.3 (Reference (ae)), the ASD(R&E):

       (1) Provides guidance to enable DTRA to integrate and synchronize S&T needed to
support DoD mission areas outlined in Reference (h).

      (2) Coordinates with, and provides DTRA access to and advocacy with, interagency
components involved in similar CWMD research and engineering and S&T development efforts.

    d. The USD(P) provides policy and guidance, through the USD(AT&L) or the ASD(NCB),
to the Director, DTRA, in accordance with this directive, for the matters described in paragraph
6b(2).




Change 1, 11/10/2015                       12
                                                                  DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


    e. The CJCS tasks DTRA to provide combat support capabilities in the context of Secretary
of Defense-approved deployment or execution orders and, in accordance with Reference (e),
executes those responsibilities applicable to DTRA’s status as a CSA.

    f. The Commander, USSTRATCOM, as the lead CCDR for synchronizing DoD CWMD
efforts:

       (1) Has direct tasking authority over the Director, SCC-WMD.

       (2) Articulates USSTRATCOM CWMD requirements, to enable DTRA to plan and
program resources adequately.

  g. In accordance with Reference (e), the CCDRs execute those responsibilities applicable to
DTRA’s status as a CSA.

   h. The other DoD Component heads:

       (1) Support DTRA within their respective fields of responsibility in the execution of
DTRA’s mission, capabilities, and functions, in accordance with applicable DoD issuances. This
includes technical intelligence and operational support and the assignment or detail of personnel
as requested by the Director, DTRA, through appropriate channels.

        (2) Coordinate with the Director, DTRA, on all programs and activities that relate to or
affect the DTRA mission.


7. AUTHORITIES. The Director, DTRA, is hereby delegated authority to:

    a. Communicate directly with the other DoD Component heads, as necessary, in carrying out
assigned responsibilities and functions, including the transmission of requests for advice and
assistance. Communications to the Military Departments must be transmitted through the
Secretaries of the Military Departments, or as otherwise provided in law or directed by the
Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the CCDRs normally must be
transmitted through the CJCS, except as provided in this directive.

   b. Obtain reports and information, in accordance with DoDI 8910.01 (Reference (af)), as
necessary, in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions.

    c. Communicate with other government officials, members of the public, and representatives
of foreign governments, as appropriate, in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions.
Communications with representatives of the Legislative Branch must be conducted through the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs and the Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense, as appropriate, and be consistent
with the DoD Legislative Program.




Change 1, 11/10/2015                        13
                                                                   DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


   d. Act as or delegate the acquisition program responsibilities of the Component Acquisition
Executive, as described in DoDI 5000.02 (Reference (ag)), for DTRA acquisition programs.

    e. Direct, administer, and provide services to foreign governments under Foreign Military
Sales, in accordance with sections 2151, et seq., and 2751, et seq., of Title 22, U.S.C. (Reference
(ah)) and the Defense Security Cooperation Manual 5105.38-M (Reference (ai)).

   f. Integrate counterintelligence activities into DTRA operations, programs, systems,
exercises, planning, doctrine, strategies, policies, and architectures. Conduct and report
counterintelligence activities, in accordance with DoDD 5240.02 (Reference (aj)).

   g. Exercise the administrative authorities contained in Enclosure 2.


8. ADMINISTRATION

   a. The Secretary of Defense selects the Director and Deputy Director, DTRA.

    b. The Secretaries of the Military Departments assign military personnel to DTRA, in
accordance with approved Joint Manpower Program authorizations and established procedures
for assignment to joint duty.


9. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


10. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance implement revisions in support
of recommendations identified in the Secretary of Defense-directed External and Internal
Nuclear Enterprise Reviews (NER). The changes also update references, organizational titles,
and other administrative fact-of-life changes.


11. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective April 24, 2013.




                                                 Ashton B. Carter
                                                 Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Delegations of Authority
Glossary



Change 1, 11/10/2015                        14
                                                                             DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


                                                ENCLOSURE 1

                                                REFERENCES


(a) Title 10, United States Code
(b) DoD Directive 5105.62, “Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA),” November 28,
    2005 (hereby cancelled)
(c) DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
    Acquisition (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(d) DoD Directive 5134.08, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear, Chemical, and
    Biological Defense Programs (ASD(NCB)),” January 14, 2009, as amended
(e) DoD Directive 3000.06, “Combat Support Agencies (CSAs),” June 27, 2013
(f) Unified Command Plan, April 6, 2011, as amended
(g) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3520.02B, “Proliferation Security
    Initiative (PSI) Activity Program,” March 5, 2015
(h) DoD Directive 2060.02, “Department of Defense (DoD) Combating Weapons of Mass
    Destruction (WMD) Policy,” April 19, 2007
(i) DoD Directive 5160.05E, “Roles and Responsibilities Associated with the Chemical and
    Biological Defense (CBD) Program (CBDP),” October 9, 2008
(j) Executive Order 13388, “Further Strengthening the Sharing of Terrorism Information to
    Protect Americans,” October 25, 2005
(k) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3125.01C, “Defense Response to
    Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear (CBRN) Incident in the Homeland,”
    June 4, 2012
(l) Presidential Decision Directive 15, “U.S. Policy on Stockpile Stewardship Under an
    Extensive Moratorium and a Comprehensive Test Ban,” November 3, 1993 1
(m) DoD Directive 3150.1, “Joint DoD-DOE Nuclear Weapon Life-Cycle Activities,” August
    26, 2002
(n) DoD Instruction 5030.14, “Disclosure of Atomic Information to Foreign Governments and
    Regional Defense Organizations,” August 17, 2011, as amended
(o) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Reorganization of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Policy,” January 9, 2015
(p) DoD Directive 2060.1, “Implementation of, and Compliance with, Arms Control
    Agreements,” January 9, 2001
(q) DoD Instruction 5205.10, “DoD Treaty Inspection Readiness Program (DTIRP),”
    February 20, 2009
(r) DoD Directive 5205.07, “Special Access Program (SAP) Policy,” July 1, 2010
(s) Sections 2333 and 2334 of Title 50, United States Code
(t) DoD Instruction 3150.09, “The Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear (CBRN)
    Survivability Policy,” April 8, 2015
(u) DoD Directive S-2060.04, “DoD Support to the National Technical Nuclear Forensics
    (NTNF) Program,” April 1, 2009, as amended


1
    On a need-to-know basis, copies may be obtained from the Office of the ASD(NCB).



Change 1, 11/10/2015                               15                                  ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


(v)  DoD Instruction 3020.52, “DoD Installation Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear,
     and High-Yield Explosive (CBRNE) Preparedness Standards,” May 18, 2012
(w) DoD Instruction 2000.12, “DoD Antiterrorism (AT) Program,” March 1, 2012, as amended
(x) DoD Instruction 2000.16, “DoD Antiterrorism (AT) Standards,” October 2, 2006,
     as amended
(y) DoD Instruction O-3000.08, “Balanced Survivability Assessments (BSAs),” January 5,
     2010, as amended
(z) DoD Instruction 5200.08, “Security of DoD Installations and Resources and the DoD
     Physical Security Review Board (PSRB),” December 10, 2005, as amended
(aa) DoD Directive 3150.08, “DoD Response to Nuclear and Radiological Incidents,”
     January 20, 2010
(ab) DoD Directive 5111.18, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Global Strategic Affairs
     (ASD(GSA)),” June 13, 2011
(ac) DoD Instruction 2000.21, “Foreign Consequence Management (FCM),” March 10, 2006
(ad) DoD Directive 5111.13, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and
     Americas’ Security Affairs (ASD(HD&ASA)),” January 16, 2009
(ae) DoD Directive 5134.3, “Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E),”
     November 3, 2003
(af) DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,” May 19, 2014
(ag) DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,” January 7, 2015
(ah) Title 22, United States Code
(ai) Defense Security Cooperation Agency Manual 5105.38-M, “Security Assistance
     Management Manual,” July 21, 2014 2
(aj) DoD Directive 5240.02, “Counterintelligence (CI),” March 17, 2015
(ak) Title 5, United States Code
(al) DoD Instruction 1400.25, Volume 451, “DoD Civilian Personnel Management System:
     Awards,” November 4, 2013
(am)DoD Instruction 5105.04, “Department of Defense Federal Advisory Committee
     Management Program,” August 6, 2007
(an) DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
     Management Program,” July 10, 2009, as amended
(ao) Executive Order 10450, “Security Requirements for Government Employment,”
     April 27, 1953
(ap) Executive Order 12968, “Access to Classified Information,” August 2, 1995
(aq) DoD Instruction 5200.02, “DoD Personnel Security Program (PSP),” March 21, 2014, as
     amended
(ar) DoD 5200.02-R, “Personnel Security Program,” January 1987, as amended
(as) Defense Travel Management Office, “The Joint Travel Regulations,” current edition
(at) Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations
(au)Title 37, United States Code
(av) Title 44, United States Code
(aw)DoD Instruction 5015.02, “DoD Records Management Program,” February 24, 2015
(ax) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” June 6, 2014, as amended
(ay) Title 31, United States Code

2
    Available at http://www.samm.dsca.mil/



Change 1, 11/10/2015                         16                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                             DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


(az) DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” April 25, 2013




Change 1, 11/10/2015                    17                           ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                               DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY


Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), through the ASD(NCB), and in accordance with DoD
policies and issuances, the Director, DTRA, or in the absence of the Director, the person acting
for the Director, is hereby delegated authority as required in the administration and operation of
DTRA to:

   a. Exercise the powers vested in the Secretary of Defense by sections 301, 302(b), 3101, and
5107 of Title 5, U.S.C. (Reference (ak)), and chapter 83 of Reference (a), as amended, on the
employment, direction, and general administration of DTRA civilian personnel.

    b. Fix rates of pay of wage-rate employees exempted from the Classification Act of 1949 by
section 5102 of Reference (ak) on the basis of rates established under the Federal Wage System.
In fixing such rates, the Director, DTRA, must follow the wage schedule established by the DoD
Wage Fixing Authority.

    c. Administer oaths of office to those entering the DoD or any other oath required by law in
connection with employment therein, in accordance with section 2903 of Reference (ak), and
designate in writing, as may be necessary, officers and employees of DTRA to perform this
function.

    d. Establish a DTRA Incentive Awards Board, and pay cash awards to, and incur necessary
expenses for the honorary recognition of, civilian employees of the USG whose suggestions,
inventions, superior accomplishments, or other personal efforts, including special acts or
services, benefit or affect DTRA, in accordance with section 4503 of Reference (ak), applicable
Office of Personnel Management regulations, and DoDI 1400.25, Volume 451 (Reference (al)).

   e. Maintain an official seal and attest to the authenticity of official records under that seal.

    f. As necessary, use advisory committees and employ temporary or intermittent experts or
consultants, as approved by the Secretary of Defense or the Deputy Chief Management Officer
of the Department of Defense, for the performance of DTRA functions, consistent with sections
173 and 174 of Reference (a); section 3109 of Reference (ak); the Federal Advisory Committee
Act (Appendix 2 of Reference (ak)); DoDI 5105.04 (Reference (am)); and DoDI 5105.18
(Reference (an)).

   g. In accordance with Executive Order 10450 (Reference (ao)), Executive Order 12968
(Reference (ap)), and DoDI 5200.02 (Reference (aq)), as appropriate:

       (1) Designate any position in DTRA as a sensitive position.




Change 1, 11/10/2015                         18                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


        (2) Authorize, in exceptional circumstances where official functions must be performed
prior to the completion of an investigation and adjudication process, temporary access to a
sensitive position in DTRA for a limited period to individuals for whom an appropriate
investigation is underway.

        (3) Initiate personnel security inquiries and, if necessary, in the interest of national
security, suspend a security clearance for personnel assigned, detailed to, or employed by DTRA.
Any actions under this paragraph must be taken in accordance with procedures prescribed in
DoD 5200.2-R (Reference (ar)).

   h. Authorize and approve:

       (1) Temporary duty travel for military personnel assigned or detailed to DTRA, in
accordance with the Joint Travel Regulations (Reference (as)).

       (2) Travel for DTRA civilian personnel, in accordance with Reference (as).

        (3) Invitational travel to non-DoD personnel whose consultative, advisory, or other
highly specialized technical services are required in a capacity that is directly related to, or in
connection with, DTRA activities, in accordance with Reference (as).

       (4) Overtime work for DTRA civilian personnel, in accordance with section 5542 of
Reference (ak) and parts 550 and 551 of Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (at)).

    i. Approve the expenditure of funds available for travel by military personnel assigned or
detailed to DTRA for expenses incident to attendance at meetings of technical, scientific,
professional, or other similar organizations in such instances when the approval of the Secretary
of Defense is required by section 455 of Title 37, U.S.C. (Reference (au)) and sections 4110 and
4111 of Reference (ak).

   j. Develop, establish, and maintain an active and continuing Records Management Program,
pursuant to section 3102 of Title 44, U.S.C. (Reference (av)) and DoDI 5015.02 (Reference
(aw)).

   k. Use the Government-Wide Purchase Card for making appropriate purchases of material
and services, other than personal services, for DTRA, when it is determined more advantageous
and consistent with the best interests of the USG.

    l. Authorize the publication of advertisements, notices, or proposals in newspapers,
magazines, or other public periodicals, as required for the effective administration and operation
of DTRA, in accordance with section 3702 of Reference (av)).

    m. Establish and maintain, for the functions assigned, an appropriate publications system for
the promulgation of agency regulations, instructions, and reference documents, and changes
thereto, similar to the policies and procedures prescribed in DoDI 5025.01 (Reference (ax)).




Change 1, 11/10/2015                          19                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


    n. Enter into interdepartmental and intragovernmental support agreements, as the receiver or
the supplier, with the other DoD Components, the non-DoD Federal Government departments
and agencies, and State and local governments, as required for effective performance of DTRA
functions and responsibilities, in accordance with section 1535 of Title 31, U.S.C. (Reference
(ay)) and DoDI 4000.19 (Reference (az)).

   o. Enter into and administer contracts, directly or through a Military Department, a DoD
contract administration services component, or other federal agency, as appropriate, for supplies,
equipment, and services required to accomplish the mission of DTRA. To the extent that any
law or Executive order specifically limits the exercise of such authority to persons at the
Secretarial level of a Military Department, such authority must be exercised by the appropriate
Under Secretary or Assistant Secretary of Defense.

    p. Establish and maintain appropriate property accounts for DTRA and appoint boards of
survey, approve reports of survey, relieve personal liability, and drop accountability for DTRA
property contained in the authorized property accounts that has been lost, damaged, stolen,
destroyed, or otherwise rendered unserviceable, in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations.

    q. Issue the necessary security regulations for the protection of property and places under the
jurisdiction of the Director, DTRA, pursuant to Reference (z).

    r. Lease property under the control of DTRA, under terms that will promote the national
defense or that are in the public interest, pursuant to section 2667 of Reference (a).

   s. Re-delegate these authorities, as appropriate, and in writing, except as otherwise
specifically indicated in this directive or as otherwise provided by law or regulation.




Change 1, 11/10/2015                        20                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013


                                         GLOSSARY

                          ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ASD(HD&GS)             Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
                       Security
ASD(NCB)               Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear, Chemical, and
                       Biological Defense Programs
ASD(R&E)               Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering

BSA                    balanced survivability assessments

CB                     chemical and biological
CBRNE                  chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and high-yield
                       explosives
CCDR                   Combatant Commander
CCMD                   Combatant Command
CJCS                   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
CJCSI                  Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction
CM                     consequence management
CP                     counterproliferation
CSA                    combat support agency
CTR                    Cooperative Threat Reduction
CWMD                   countering weapons of mass destruction

DHS                    Department of Homeland Security
DNSIO                  Defense Nuclear Surety Inspection Oversights
DNSMI                  Defense Nuclear Surety Monitor Inspections
DoDD                   DoD Directive
DoDI                   DoD Instruction
DOE                    Department of Energy
DTRA                   Defense Threat Reduction Agency

EEUM                   Enhanced End Use Monitoring

FCM                    foreign consequence management

GCC                    geographic Combatant Commander

IMAAC                  Interagency Modeling Atmospheric and Assessment Center

JSIVA                  Joint Staff integrated vulnerability assessment


Change 1, 11/10/2015                          21                                     GLOSSARY
                                                                DoDD 5105.62, April 24, 2013



MDAP                   major defense acquisition program

NTNF                   national technical nuclear forensics
NWC                    Nuclear Weapons Council
NWTI                   nuclear weapons technical inspection

PPBE                   planning, programming, budgeting, and execution

R&D                    research and development
RDT&E                  research, development, test, and evaluation

S&T                    Science and Technology
SCC-WMD                United States Strategic Command Center for Combating Weapons
                       of Mass Destruction

U.S.C.                 United States Code
USD(AT&L)              Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
                       Logistics
USD(P)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USG                    U.S. Government
USSTRATCOM             United States Strategic Command

WMD                    weapons of mass destruction
WMD-T                  weapons of mass destruction terrorism




Change 1, 11/10/2015                          22                                GLOSSARY
