                               Department of Defense
                                  INSTRUCTION
                                                                             NUMBER 1000.27
                                                                                October 28, 2008
                                              Incorporating Change 1, Effective January 16, 2025

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Mass Transportation Benefit Program

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and sets procedural guidance consistent with
the authority provided in DoD Directive 5124.02 (Reference (a)) for the administration and
management of the Mass Transportation Benefit Program (MTBP) as directed by Section 7905
of Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), and Executive Order 13150 (References (b) and (c)).

    b. Incorporates and supersedes previous Deputy Secretary of Defense guidance (Reference
(d)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies,
the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense
(hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The Department of Defense shall provide mass transportation benefits (MTBs) to offset
commuting costs to its active duty military members and employees, including nonappropriated
fund (NAF) employees, to the extent authorized by law and regulation, to reduce pollution and
traffic congestion, preserve the environment, and expand transportation alternatives inside the
National Capital Region (NCR) and outside the NCR (ONCR).

    b. Only those active duty military members and civilian employees who meet the eligibility
criteria in this Instruction may participate in the MTBP.
                                                                 DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008



  c. Command and installation MTBs shall be established when there is employee or military
member interest, regardless of the number of personnel so interested.

    d. MTBs will be authorized only when qualified means of transportation (QMOT) systems
are used.

    e. The MTBP shall be adequately funded to prevent benefit restriction or denial. The
statutory increases governed by Section 132 of Title 26, U.S.C. (Reference (e)), shall be adhered
to by all the DoD Components.

    f. Commuting costs shall not include costs incurred for parking, van pool, ferry cost, or costs
for holding van pool space during an extended absence.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. Enclosures 3 through 8 provide overarching procedures and requirements
for the administration, implementation, and management of the MTBP.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update:

   a. Paragraphs 1 and 2 of Enclosure 4 to comply with Section 3111(c) of Reference (b).

   b. Organizational titles and references.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective October 28, 2008.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Program Management and Oversight

Change 1, January 16, 2025                    2
                                              DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


   4. Participant Eligibility
   5. QMOT
   6. Subsidized Parking
   7. Calculating Commuting Costs
   8. Criteria for Submission of Claims
   Glossary




Change 1, January 16, 2025                3
                                                                                                DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS

REFERENCES ......................................................................................................................4

RESPONSIBILITIES ............................................................................................................5

     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND
        READINESS (USD(P&R)) ........................................................................................5
     DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR CIVILIAN
        PERSONNEL POLICY (DASD(CPP))......................................................................5
     IG DoD.............................................................................................................................5
     HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS ........................................................................5
     DIRECTOR, DEFENSE FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING SERVICE (DFAS) ...........7
     DIRECTOR, WHS ...........................................................................................................7
     LOCAL COMMAND AND INSTALLATION PMS .....................................................7
     REVIEWING OFFICIAL (RO) .......................................................................................8
     SUPERVISORS ...............................................................................................................9
     PARTICIPANTS .............................................................................................................9

PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND OVERSIGHT.............................................................10

PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY .............................................................................................12

QMOT ....................................................................................................................................14

SUBSIDIZED PARKING .....................................................................................................16

CALCULATING COMMUTING COSTS............................................................................18

CRITERIA FOR SUBMISSION OF CLAIMS .....................................................................20

GLOSSARY ..........................................................................................................................22

     PART I: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ........................................................22
     PART II: DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................23




Change 1, January 16, 2025                                        3
                                                                                                                              CONTENTS
                                                            DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b)    Title 5, United States Code
(c)   Executive Order 13150, “Federal Workforce Transportation,” April 21, 2000
(d)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Department of Defense Transportation
      Incentive Program,” October 13, 2000 (hereby canceled)
(e)   Section 132 of Title 26, United States Code
(f)   DoD Instruction 5010.40, “Managers’ Internal Control Program Procedures,” May 30,
      2013, as amended
(g)   Chapter 47 of Title 10, United States Code
(h)   DoD Instruction 1015.15, “Establishment, Management, and Control of Nonappropriated
      Fund Instrumentalities and Financial Management of Supporting Resources,”
      October 31, 2007, as amended
(i)   Section 1.132- 9 of Title 26, Code of Federal Regulations
(j)   Section 101 of Title 37, United States Code




Change 1, January 16, 2025                   4                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall have overall responsibility for the DoD MTBP.


2. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR CIVILIAN PERSONNEL
POLICY (DASD(CPP)). The DASD(CPP), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), shall:

   a. Develop policy in coordination with the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Military Personnel Policy and the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial
Officer, Department of Defense.

   b. Provide advice and guidance on policy interpretation, in support of the USD(P&R).

   c. Assess field program accountability through Human Capital Accountability and
Assessment Framework reviews.

   d. Monitor program integrity by ensuring DoD Component completion of required Internal
Controls and reviewing the IG DoD reports on MTBP operations.


3. IG DoD. The IG DoD shall:

   a. Periodically review DoD Component program operations to ensure consistency with
governing rules and regulations.

   b. Report any findings to the USD(P&R) for needed program policy adjustments.


4. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

    a. Develop an MTBP, to include budget and appropriate funding for transit subsidies and
program administrative support. This authority may be re-delegated to the installation or field
activity command level.

   b. Ensure MTBP participation is adequately funded to prevent benefit restriction or denial
and may further define funding sources in internal policy and procedure. Provide funding and
administrative oversight, as needed, for participating DoD Component members ONCR.

   c. Provide funding and administrative support, as needed, to the Washington Headquarters
Services (WHS) for participating DoD Component members in the NCR.



Change 1, January 16, 2025                      5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008



   d. Develop DoD Component-level policy and procedures for program administration.

    e. Implement a comprehensive system of internal management controls that provides
reasonable assurance that the MTBP is operating as intended, according to DoD
Instruction 5010.40 (Reference (f)).

    f. Evaluate the adequacy of the internal management controls over the MTBP and review,
assess, and report on the effectiveness of those controls in an annual Statement of Assurance
according to Reference (f).

   g. Establish and implement an internal control program that ensures the integrity of and
accountability for MTBP operations, in accordance with criteria in Enclosure 3.

   h. Investigate allegations of program abuse and determine sanctions as necessary.

       (1) Civilian employees who fail to abide by the terms and conditions of the MTBP may
be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including removal from the Federal service and/or
criminal prosecution, as appropriate.

       (2) Military members who violate the provisions of the MTBP may be subject to
administrative action and/or punitive action under the Uniform Code of Military Justice
(Reference (g)), as appropriate.

   i. Ensure procedures are in place for MTBP officials to have access to data needed to ensure
program integrity, e.g., subsidized parking information.

    j. Appoint, in writing, an office of primary responsibility (OPR) to manage the MTBP. The
program OPR shall be responsible, either personally or through delegations of administrative
responsibilities to Program Managers (PMs) at local commands and installations, for:

       (1) Developing the method for processing and overseeing applications and claims, or
overseeing an automated application and claim process.

        (2) Providing for purchase and distribution of transportation vouchers to eligible
participants.

       (3) Providing oversight to program operations through development and implementation
of a comprehensive internal controls program.

         (4) Providing guidance to command leadership regarding sanctions to address program
abuse.

   k. Contract, where appropriate, to order, purchase, verify, maintain, and safeguard fare
media.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                      6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


        (1) The DoD Components are responsible for ensuring contractor compliance with terms
of contracts.

        (2) Agreements with service providers should include a requirement for internal auditing
as required by the DoD Component.


5. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING SERVICE (DFAS). In addition
to the responsibilities in Section 4, and under the authority, direction, and control of the Under
Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense, the
Director, DFAS, shall:

   a. Process, if applicable, mass transportation benefits or collections based on approved
Standard Form (SF) 1164, “Claim for Reimbursement for Expenditures on Official Business,” or
other DoD-sanctioned reimbursement forms, applications, or automated systems.

   b. Bill customers for processing costs consistent with Defense Working Capital Fund rules.


6. DIRECTOR, WHS. In addition to the responsibilities in Section 4, the Director, WHS shall:

    a. Develop, administer, monitor, and evaluate the MTBP for all of the DoD Components in
the NCR.

  b. Bill and receive funding from DoD Components for services rendered to DoD Component
members under the WHS NCR MTBP.


7. LOCAL COMMAND AND INSTALLATION PMs. In accordance with DoD Component
policy, and as needed for effective program operations, local command and installation
commanders shall appoint a PM to support the OPR in the administration of the local program
and to perform the following:

   a. Implement DoD Component MTBP policies and procedures.

   b. Ensure the local command or installation MTBP complies with applicable law,
regulations, and ethics principles.

    c. Provide DoD ethics briefing materials for participants upon initial enrollment in the
program and, where program administration is automated, provide annual ethics reminders
thereafter.

    d. Provide for purchase, which may be accomplished through a service provider, and
distribution of transportation vouchers to eligible participants (except in areas where vouchers
are not readily available).




Change 1, January 16, 2025                       7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


   e. Perform, at a minimum, a 10 percent annual record reconciliation to ensure participant
accounts are correct.

   f. Conduct 100 percent annual participant re-enrollment at locations where program
administration is automated.

   g. Institute procedures for identifying and processing applicant situational changes that could
impact mass transportation benefit eligibility or require reimbursement to the government, e.g.,
departure from command, change of residence, and extended temporary duty (TDY) or leave.

   h. Annually assess program operations in accordance with DoD Component policy or
procedures, to ensure program integrity and affirm completion of this assessment to DoD
Component OPRs.

   i. Perform the duties of the OPR, depending on the scope of the program.


8. REVIEWING OFFICIAL (RO). The RO is the local responsible party, designated in
accordance with DoD Component policy, who is knowledgeable of the program requirements.
The RO shall:

    a. Review program requirements with, or provide requirements information to, program
participants.

    b. Receive and review applications for completeness, including work address, commuting
origination point, reasonableness of commuting costs, and supervisory signature.

    c. Ensure participant eligibility in accordance with criteria in Enclosures 4 and 5 as indicated
in the cost calculation worksheet and participant application.

    d. Ensure applicants are not in receipt of a parking subsidy, as defined in Enclosure 6,
through comparison of participant and parking databases.

    e. Receive certification from program participants, which indicates understanding of and
agreement to conform to all program requirements.

    f. Require supporting documentation for program participants, including commuting cost
calculations as outlined in Enclosure 7, and conduct a random sample of calculations to ensure
program compliance with program regulations.

    g. Sign the application form in the appropriate block or return to applicant for clarifying
information. Upon automation of application functions, follow system procedures replacing the
manual review and signature processes.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                       8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


9. SUPERVISORS. Supervisors shall:

   a. Confirm the applicant as an eligible military member or a DoD civilian employee.

   b. Confirm the accuracy of the duty station as stated on the MTBP.

    c. Ensure the commuting cost calculation reflects the applicant’s correct work schedule, e.g.,
part-time or full-time, and/or work situation, e.g., telework.

   d. Sign the application form.

    e. Conduct other actions that may be required by local, command, or DoD Component
policy.

   f. Forward application according to applicable local, command, or DoD Component policy
and procedures to ensure the application is processed in accordance with criteria in Enclosure 8.


10. PARTICIPANTS. Participants are responsible for adhering to all program criteria outlined
in this Instruction and with local, command, or DoD Component procedures. Participants shall
use this benefit solely for the purposes outlined in the Policy section of this Instruction.
Participants shall not seek personal financial gain through trade or sale of the benefit. Claims for
the MTBP shall be based solely on costs associated with the use of a QMOT to and from the
worksite in conjunction with employment in the Department of Defense. Benefits are authorized
only if a QMOT is used. Parking costs may not be claimed under the MTBP. Participants shall:

   a. Request participation in the MTBP using either the DoD MTBP standard application form
and any local supplemental form that may be required or automated application, as available.

   b. Meet the eligibility requirements in Enclosures 4 and 5 to participate in the program.

   c. Adhere to all governing program rules and regulations.

   d. Complete required ethics training.

   e. Submit SF 1164 or other reimbursement forms designated by DoD Component procedures
within the timeframes required for reimbursement claim.

   f. Forward application according to applicable local, command, or DoD Component policy
and procedures to ensure the application is processed in accordance with criteria in Enclosure 8.

    g. Upon separation, extended leave, or TDY, or when fare media is unused, participant will
return unused fare media or reimburse the Government via applicable Service or agency
guidelines.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                       9                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                           PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND OVERSIGHT


1. To prevent and detect waste, fraud, and abuse, commands and field installations are required
to develop internal management control procedures and mechanisms and conduct internal
reviews to assess whether their MTBPs conform to the DoD policy, guidance, and procedures
established in this Instruction. In an annual Statement of Assurance (see Reference (f)), each
DoD Component must provide assurance that internal management controls are operating as
intended. Internal controls shall include:

    a. Provision of DoD ethics briefing materials for participants upon initial enrollment in the
program and, where program administration is automated, provide annual ethics reminders
thereafter.

   b. Periodic reviews and reconciliations or comparisons of mass transportation benefit and
parking databases to ensure adherence to applicant eligibility criteria.

    c. Institution and implementation of procedures to identify and process situational changes
that could impact the amount of the mass transportation benefit, or would require reimbursement
to the Government, e.g., change in commuting patterns, extended TDY, or leave.

   d. Removal from the MTBP as part of the installation or command exit procedures.

   e. Validation of information provided on participants’ applications, including:

         (1) Eligibility

         (2) Work address

         (3) Commuting origination point

         (4) Certification statement

         (5) Commuting cost breakdown

   f. Confirmation that:

         (1) Participants have been provided a false statement warning.

         (2) Participants’ supervisors have reviewed and signed the participants’ application
forms.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                       10                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


2. Until such time as the application process is automated, a minimum of 10 percent of MTBP
participants will be required to recertify annually to ensure the overall integrity of the program.
Upon implementation of an automated application process, participants may be required to
reapply or recertify annually.


3. The MTBP shall be included as an assessable unit in both the command’s Managers’ Internal
Control Program and DoD Component Inspector General audits.


4. MTBP PMs must ensure that internal controls are not accusatory and conform to governing
laws and ethics principles, including relevant labor relations statutes. The intent of internal
control measures is not to discourage participation through harassment, but to ensure compliance
with program guidelines.


5. DoD Components are encouraged to collect and periodically review, as part of their program
management oversight responsibilities:

    a. Official documentation on work schedules for participants who work part-time, telework,
or have unusual working hours.

   b. Copies of contracts, invoices, or receipts from van pool participants, to ensure the van
pool is in compliance with the regulations of the program.


6. The DoD Components shall optimize the use of DoD automated systems, where available, to
improve the efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability of processing applications; verification
and reconciliation of applicant information; and program reporting. Systems used shall be
compatible with automated DoD personnel and pay systems.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                       11                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008



                                        ENCLOSURE 4

                                 PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY


1. To be eligible to participate in the DoD MTBP, participants must:

    a. Use a QMOT as the primary mode of transportation to commute to and from work or to a
designated telework center;

   b. Not be receiving mass transportation benefits from other sources;

   c. Not be in receipt of a parking subsidy; and

   d. Fall within one of five categories:

       (1) DoD Active Component (AC) Military Service members.

       (2) DoD Reserve Component (RC) Military Service members (including both Reservists
and National Guard Members) who are on qualifying active duty. Eligible RC Service members
on Active Duty for less than 30 days:

           (a) Must apply for the MTB in the same manner as is applicable to AC Service
members in the same geographic area. Approved program enrollment is a prerequisite for any
form of reimbursement under the MTBP.

            (b) May be denied fare media disbursement of MTB by DoD Component policy. In
those cases where fare media is not disbursed to these members, DoD Component policy must
allow for the MTB via reimbursement procedures.

       (3) DoD Federal civilian employees, including Federal employees on part-time work
schedules and paid interns.

       (4) DoD NAF personnel employed by a duly constituted DoD nonappropriated fund
instrumentality (NAFI). To the extent Military Departments are authorized to provide
appropriated fund support to NAFIs for military and civilian personnel under Table E4.T1 of
DoD Instruction 1015.15 (Reference (h)), the Departments may budget to include amounts for
MTBs for supported categories of personnel.

       (5) Students or others who provide voluntary service, in accordance with Section 3111(c)
of Reference (b).


2. Personnel ineligible for participation in the DoD MTBP include:




Change 1, January 16, 2025                     12                             ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


    a. DoD civilian employees and military members who are named on a Federally subsidized
parking permit. However, relinquishment of a Federally subsidized parking permit will allow
the employee to apply for the MTBP.

   b. Van pool owners who are drivers or passengers of a for-profit van pool.

    c. Military member, civilian, and NAF employee van pool drivers riding at no cost or
receiving compensation, monetary or non-monetary, for driving the van pool (except for those
only receiving a reduced rate).

    d. DoD RC Service members who are drilling or training in an inactive duty for training
status.

   e. NAF-employed personnel whose salary is not funded by a duly constituted NAFI.

    f. Reserve Officer Training Corps students unless they are enlisted in a military branch and
serving on active duty.

   g. DoD military retirees and DoD civilian retirees unless otherwise eligible.

   h. Military dependents unless otherwise eligible.

   i. Military members, and civilian and NAF employees who are receiving transportation
benefits from other sources.

   j. Contractors.

    k. Intergovernmental Personnel Act employees (except those appointed to Federal positions
or those who meet the definition of employees under Section 2105 of Reference (b)), Foreign
Exchange personnel, and personnel detailed to DoD from other Federal agencies,
nongovernment organizations, private industry, and academic institutions.


3. Eligible personnel may not be placed on a waiting list for enrollment into the program outside
the normal enrollment process.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                     13                                  ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                  DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                         ENCLOSURE 5

                                              QMOT


QMOT are:

   a. Commuter bus.

   b. Commuter train.

   c. Subway or light rail.

   d. Ferry.

        (1) Ferries are an approved form of mass transportation to the workplace. Program
participants using a ferry are authorized to claim the foot passenger rate only. This includes
walkers, bicyclists, and van pool members (not including the driver).

        (2) Ferries are not an approved form of public transportation when used as a means to
shuttle the participant’s privately owned vehicle (POV) from one point to another where the
POV is used to complete the journey to a participant’s duty station.

   e. Van Pools.

        (1) To be considered as a QMOT, van pools must meet the guidelines stated in
Section 1.132-9, Title 26, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (i)), and be engaged in “for
profit” as that term is interpreted under Reference (e). The vehicle may be owned and operated
by either public transit authorities (commercial) or by a private vendor in the business of
transporting persons for compensation or hire, and must have seating capacity for at least six
adults, not including the driver. Private van pools are subject to the same eligibility criteria as
commercial or private vendor van pools. Where local transit authorities exist, van pool
operators should comply with rules and procedures established by that local transit authority, to
include registration. DoD Components may require van pool registration in internal policy.

        (2) Rental vehicles, personal car-pools, ride sharing by individual riders often referred to
as “slugs,” or employee purchased vans that do not meet the requirements under Reference (e)
are not considered QMOT.

       (3) Van pool drivers may be eligible for the MTB only when they:

           (a) Do not own or operate the van pool;

           (b) Are not in receipt of another form of compensation for their driving service;

           (c) Do not profit for the service of driving the van; and/or



Change 1, January 16, 2025                       14                                ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                 DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008



           (d) Incur a cost for participating in the van pool.

       (4) If van pool operators need advice on QMOT eligibility requirements, the operator
should consult with his or her own private attorney, accountant, etc., to determine whether the
requirements are met.

        (5) Van pool riders who must pay to “hold” their space in the van pool due to extended
absence (e.g., TDY or leave) or part-time work schedule are responsible for the cost of holding
their space. This expense may not be included in commuter cost calculations. Exceptions to this
policy will be made on a case-by-case basis by the command or installation MTBP PM.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                      15                               ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                  DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                          ENCLOSURE 6

                                     SUBSIDIZED PARKING


1. A military member or DoD civilian or NAF employee who receives subsidized parking is not
eligible to participate in the MTBP.


2. Subsidized parking refers to a space, which may be occupied by a POV, including
motorcycles, and which the Government owns or pays any part of the cost. Subsidized parking
includes:

   a. Parking spaces specifically reserved for an individual by name or title.

   b. General parking spaces for which an applicant must register and obtain a parking permit.

    c. Spaces in a commercial lot for which the Government has obtained preferred or
discounted rates.

        (1) These rates may be obtained through terms included in negotiated lease agreements
in buildings occupied by DoD employees or members of the Services.

       (2) Spaces may be located on or in:

             (a) Government installations.

             (b) Leased buildings.

             (c) Government-owned buildings.

             (d) Areas adjacent or located in the vicinity of Government installations or leased
buildings.


3. Issuance of a decal for entrance onto a military or DoD facility does not constitute subsidized
parking.


4. Installations and commands must establish standard operating procedures that govern parking
for employees who are MTBP participants. At a minimum these procedures must require:

    a. Participants to relinquish assigned parking spaces as a condition of participation in the
MTBP. Exceptions to this policy will be made on a case-by-case basis by the command or
installation MTBP PM.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                       16                                ENCLOSURE 6
                                                               DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


    b. Periodic reconciliation of parking registrant and MTBP applicant records and/or databases
to identify for corrective action those receiving benefits under both programs where automated
systems enable cross-referencing of data. DoD Component policies will prescribe a procedure
for periodic reconciliation of available parking records to MTBP participants to ensure program
integrity.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                    17                               ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                        ENCLOSURE 7

                           CALCULATING COMMUTING COSTS


1. Participants shall estimate their monthly commuting costs, based on the actual average
number of days they use mass transportation. Parking costs, tolls, and van pool ferry cost shall
not be used in establishing commuter costs, nor shall costs for holding van pool space.


2. In order to calculate commuting expenses:

    a. Compute the monthly cost by multiplying the daily commute cost by the average number
of days when mass transportation will be used. There are 21 workdays in an average month for a
participant working full time and commuting 5 days per week.

   b. Part-time employees or participants not using mass transportation for every workday, or
working compressed work schedules, will calculate costs based only for days commuting to and
from the workplace using a QMOT.

    c. All participants must work in a prudent manner to purchase the most cost-effective
combination of fare media available. For example, if a monthly pass costs less than four weekly
passes or 21 daily passes, the participant must purchase the monthly pass. Similarly, if a
participant uses mass transportation 10 days out of a month and 10 daily passes are less than a
monthly pass, he or she must purchase the daily passes. MTBP application should provide
information regarding commuter choices to facilitate applicant’s ability to determine most cost-
effective fare media.


3. Applicants’ commuting costs shall be verified by the DoD Component’s designated RO to the
extent practicable.


4. In those locations where the Department of Transportation (DOT) purchases fare media from
local transit authorities, the fare media issued to each participant will be based on the
denominations purchased by DOT from local transit vendors. In some locations, the
denominations issued do not provide the flexibility to exactly match the employee’s monthly
allowance. In those cases, participants may receive more than their monthly allowance. For
example, if the participant is claiming $58, DOT may send fare media totaling $60 as a result of
not having exact denominations. When fare media exceeds actual costs, the difference will be
absorbed into the local transit system. Participants are not authorized to receive change from a
vendor for fare media they submit. DOT does not issue fare media in denominations less
than $1.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                     18                                ENCLOSURE 7
                                                               DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


5. A participant may not accrue and stockpile unused fare media from one disbursement period
to be used in a subsequent disbursement period so as to reduce their own out-of-pocket expenses.


6. When the amount of the MTB received in previous disbursement periods exceeds the amount
needed (e.g., due to unforeseen leave or TDY), participants must adjust their calculations of
commuting costs in the following disbursement period, or reimburse the Government via
applicable DoD Component guidelines.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                    19                               ENCLOSURE 7
                                                                DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                        ENCLOSURE 8

                         CRITERIA FOR SUBMISSION OF CLAIMS


1. Participants shall not make false claims overstating commuting costs or claim costs for days
they did not commute to work via a QMOT.


2. Claims shall only be submitted when they meet the program criteria as stated in this
Instruction.

    a. Claims can be made for the days an employee uses a QMOT to commute to work. PMs
may make an exception when a monthly fare media is less expensive than a claim made for
individual days of ridership.

    b. Claims for part-time work for participants, including teleworkers and those on
compressed work schedules, are calculated based on the actual number of days they commuted
to and from work or a designated telework center.


3. Claims are not permitted:

   a. On a retroactive basis for disbursement of fare media. Delays between the date of
application for the MTBP and approval of the application are not an exception.

    b. For commuting costs while on TDY status. Participants on TDY should make claims for
reimbursement of actual transportation costs incurred via travel vouchers through appropriate
programs or procedures and funds established for that specific purpose.

    c. While the participant is on leave unless the leave is used during the workday and does not
preclude commuting to or from the worksite via a QMOT.

   d. If the participant is named on a federally subsidized workplace motor vehicle parking
permit (including motorcycles) unless otherwise provided in Enclosure 7.

    e. If the participant has separated from the Department of Defense or from the command.
Participants who make a change in permanent duty station may be required to reapply in the
MTBP at the new duty station or work location.


4. Participants must return unused fare media received for future months if they have lost
eligibility for the DoD MTBP, electively withdrawn from the program, or unused fare media is
remaining. DoD Component procedures for fare media return must be followed. Participants
who do not return unused fare media must make a repayment to the DoD Component before they
leave DoD employment status.



Change 1, January 16, 2025                     20                                ENCLOSURE 8
                                                                   DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008



5. SF 1164 may be used as a method of reimbursement for the MTBP in areas where transit fare
media are not available. OPRs, MTBP PMs, and/or resource managers will have joint
responsibility for approval and administration of the SF 1164 portion of the MTBP.

   a. Participants will refer to their local procedures for completion and submission of the
SF 1164. At a minimum, the SF 1164 should include:

       (1) That reimbursement is being sought under the DoD MTBP.

       (2) The method of transportation used.

       (3) The period for which reimbursement is being sought.

       (4) The amount of reimbursement being sought, with the basis for the calculation.

       (5) Certification that the costs reflect only those accrued for transportation back and forth
to work via a QMOT.

   b. The resource manager or other designated individual will forward the SF 1164 to the
appropriate paying entity for processing.

    c. Participants will be reimbursed through electronic funds transfer. The payment will be
directly deposited into the account that the participant has designated for receipt of their salary.


6. Subject to the rules under Reference (i), payments correctly received under the MTBP are not
considered income for the purpose of income tax.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                       21                                  ENCLOSURE 8
                                                              DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                        GLOSSARY

                     PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AC           Active Component

DASD(CPP) Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Civilian Personnel Policy
DFAS      Defense Finance and Accounting Service
DOT       Department of Transportation

IG DoD       Inspector General of the Department of Defense

MTB          mass transportation benefit
MTBP         Mass Transportation Benefit Program

NAF          nonappropriated fund
NAFI         nonappropriated fund instrumentality
NCR          National Capital Region

ONCR         outside the National Capital Region
OPR          office of primary responsibility

PM           program manager
POV          privately owned vehicle

QMOT         qualified means of transportation

RC           Reserve Component
RO           reviewing official

SF           Standard Form

TDY          temporary duty

U.S.C.       United States Code
USD(P&R)     Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness

WHS          Washington Headquarters Services




Change 1, January 16, 2025                   22                                 GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

active duty military members. Full-time duty in the Active Service in an AC or RC. In the case
of an RC member, such service shall be under a call or order to active duty as defined in
Section 101 of Title 37, U.S.C. (Reference (j)).

cash reimbursement arrangement. A nontaxable cash payment, in addition to regular
compensation, by the Department of Defense to its MTBP participants for expenses incurred or
paid for fare media or van pools. The term “cash reimbursement” does not include cash
advances. A cash reimbursement arrangement is not authorized when vouchers are readily
available.

disbursements. For the DoD MTBP, the act of providing a voucher to trade for fare cards, or
other acceptable form of payment for mass transportation to commute to and from the workplace
or a designated telework center, prior to an upcoming period.

distribution. Act of disbursement of the MTB to participants via a voucher or other fare media.

DoD MTBP. A DoD program whereby the Department of Defense provides fare media or
implements a cash reimbursement arrangement for participant commuting costs to reduce traffic
congestion, air pollution, and to expand participant commuting alternatives.

fare media. Any pass, token, farecard, voucher, or similar item that entitles a person to
transportation: (a) on mass transit facilities (whether or not publicly owned); or (b) in van pools
owned and operated either by public transit authorities or by a person in the business of
transporting persons for compensation or hire. A voucher is an item that may be exchanged only
for fare media.

ferry. A boat used for carrying passengers across a river or other body of water. (See Enclosure
6 for information on the use of a ferry as a QMOT.)

NCR. Includes the District of Columbia; Montgomery, Prince George’s, and Frederick Counties
in Maryland; Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, and Prince William Counties in Virginia; and all
cities now or hereafter existing in Maryland and Virginia within the geographic area bounded by
the outer boundaries of the combined area of said counties.

OPR. The organizational entity with responsibility for management of the DoD Component
MTBP PM. The local command or installation individual responsible for implementing,
monitoring, and assessing the local program. The PM may also serve as the RO.

ONCR. The 50 states (exclusive of the area included in the definition of the NCR), the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.



Change 1, January 16, 2025                       23                                   GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008



PM. Individual assigned duties by the local command or installation to support the OPR in the
administration of the local program.

QMOT. Commercial or public transportation operated for use by the general public and/or
modes of transportation that meet the requirements of Reference (i).

readily available. A transportation voucher or similar item that a DoD Component can obtain:
(a) on terms no less favorable than those available to an individual member or employee; and (b)
without incurring a significant administrative cost.

recertification. The process by which a qualified participant confirms his or her eligibility to
continue to receive the transit subsidy. Recertification may be accomplished through required
re-enrollment.

reimbursement. For areas where fare media are not available, payment of MTB to a participant
after the transportation has occurred and an appropriate claim has been made and approved.

repayment. Participant or former participant reimbursement to the DoD Component following
an overpayment.

RO. Local individual responsible for reviewing program requirements, providing information to
participants, receiving certifications from participants, and reviewing applications for
completeness and compliance with eligibility requirements.

self-certify. Confirmation that occurs during the initial application, change in application, and/or
recertification process, whereby the eligible employee reads a certification statement that
outlines all program requirements, and agrees to abide by those requirements, by his or her
written or electronic signature.

subsidized parking. Parking that is owned by the Government or for which it pays any part of
the cost. Subsidized parking includes parking spaces, specifically reserved for an individual by
name or title. (See Enclosure 7 for subsidized parking information.) Subsidized parking does
not include installation access decals on POVs.

telework. An arrangement in which an employee performs officially assigned duties at an
alternative worksite on either a regular and recurring or an ad hoc basis (not including while on
official travel). Telework locations may be the employee’s home or a telework center.

telework center. A designated site set up with computer(s) and telephone(s), specifically
provided for use by teleworkers, that enables employees to work at an alternative work location.

transportation benefit. A nontaxable benefit whereby the Department of Defense provides
vouchers or similar items in amounts that do not exceed personal commuting costs, up to the
maximum amount allowed by Reference (e).




Change 1, January 16, 2025                      24                                    GLOSSARY
                                                              DoDI 1000.27, October 28, 2008


transit subsidy. A nontaxable transportation benefit providing employees with vouchers or other
fare media to commute via mass transit to and/or from work up to the maximum amount allowed
by Reference (e).

van pool. A commercially owned highway vehicle with seating capacity for AT LEAST six
adults, not including the driver, and that meets the QMOT requirements identified in
Enclosure 5.

voucher. A non-monetary item that may be exchanged only for fare media that serves as
payment for use of a QMOT under this program, such as a transit pass or van pool payment.




Change 1, January 16, 2025                    25                                  GLOSSARY
