                                    Department of Defense
                                       INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 1000.11
                                                                                January 16, 2009
                                                 Incorporating Change 1, Effective May 17, 2018

                                                                                           USD(C)

SUBJECT: Financial Institutions on DoD Installations

References: (a) DoD Directive 1000.11, “Financial Institutions on DoD Installations,”
                June 9, 2000 (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Directives Program,” October 28, 2007
            (c) DoD Directive 5118.03, “Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief
                Financial Officer, Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO),” April 20, 2012
            (d) DoD 7000.14-R, Volume 5, Chapter 34, “Department of Defense Financial
                Management Regulation (FMR),” November 2008
            (e) Title 12, United States Code
            (f) Part 230 of title 32, Code of Federal Regulations, current edition


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Reissues Reference (a) as a DoD Instruction in accordance with the guidance in Reference
(b) and the authority in Reference (c).

   b. Updates policies and responsibilities for financial institutions that serve DoD personnel
on DoD installations worldwide. Implementing guidance is located in Reference (d).

    c. Prescribes consistent arrangements for the provision of services by financial institutions
among the DoD Components and requires that financial institutions operating on DoD
installations provide, and are provided, support consistent with the policies stated herein.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

    a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as
the “DoD Components”).
                                                                 DoDI 1000.11, January 16, 2009


   b. All nonappropriated fund instrumentalities, including the Military Exchange Services and
morale, welfare, and recreation activities.


3. DEFINITIONS. Terms used in this Instruction are set forth in Reference (d).


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

     a. Except where they already existed as of May 1, 2000, no more than one banking
institution and one credit union, as established in chapter 14 of title 12, United States Code
(Reference (e)) shall be permitted to operate on a DoD installation consistent with part 230 of
title 32, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (f)).

    b. Upon the request of an installation commander and with the approval of the Secretary of
the Military Department concerned (or designee), duly chartered financial institutions may be
authorized to provide financial services on DoD installations to enhance the morale and welfare
of DoD personnel and facilitate the administration of public and quasi-public funds.
Arrangement for the provision of such services shall be in accordance with this Instruction and
the applicable provisions in Reference (d).

    c. Financial institutions or branches thereof, shall be established on DoD installations only
after approval by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned (or designee) and the
appropriate regulatory agency in accordance with Reference (d).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

   a. The Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of
Defense (USD(C)/CFO). The USD(C)/CFO shall develop policies governing establishment,
operation, and termination of financial institutions on DoD installations and take final action on
requests for exceptions to this Instruction.

    b. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)).
The USD(AT&L) shall monitor policies and procedures governing logistical support furnished to
financial institutions on DoD installations, including the use of DoD real property and
equipment.

    c. Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R)
shall advise the USD(C)/CFO on all aspects of on-base financial institution services that affect
the morale and welfare of DoD personnel.

    d. Heads of the DoD Components. The Heads of the DoD Components shall adhere to
responsibilities pertaining to this Instruction and as set forth in Reference (d).




Change 1, 05/17/2018                             2
                                                           DoDI 1000.11, January 16, 2009


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective January 16, 2009.




                                         Acting Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/
                                         DoD Chief Financial Officer




Change 1, 05/17/2018                        3
