                                Department of Defense
                                   DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 3025.18
                                                                            December 29, 2010
                                                         Incorporating Change 2, March 19, 2018

                                                                                           USD(P)

SUBJECT:      Defense Support of Civil Authorities (DSCA)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

   a. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for DSCA.

   b. Incorporates and cancels DoD Directive (DoDD) 3025.1 and DoDD 3025.15
(References (a) and (b)).

    c. Provides guidance for implementing the regulations (in DoD Instruction (DoDI) 3025.21
(Reference (c))) required by section 275 of title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.), (Reference (d))
regarding military support of civilian law enforcement.

    d. Provides guidance for the execution and oversight of DSCA when requested by civil
authorities or by qualifying entities and approved by the appropriate DoD official, or as directed
by the President, within the United States, including the District of Columbia, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and any territory or possession of the United
States or any political subdivision thereof.

   e. Authorizes immediate response authority for providing DSCA, when requested.

   f. Authorizes emergency authority for the use of military force, under dire circumstances, as
described in paragraph 4.k. above the signature of this Directive.

    g. Incorporates the Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (e)), which is
hereby cancelled.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive:
                                                              DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”).

    b. Applies to the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard (hereafter referred to
collectively as the “National Guard”) personnel when under Federal command and control. Also
applies to National Guard personnel when the Secretary of Defense determines that it is
appropriate to employ National Guard personnel in title 32, U.S.C. (Reference (f)), status to
fulfill a request for DSCA, the Secretary of Defense requests the concurrence of the Governors
of the affected States, and those Governors concur in the employment of National Guard
personnel in such a status.

    c. Applies to all DSCA (except the specific forms of DSCA listed in paragraph 2.d. of this
section), including but not limited to:

       (1) Mutual or automatic aid, also known as reciprocal fire protection agreements (see
chapter 15A of title 42, U.S.C. (Reference (g))).

       (2) DoD fire and emergency services programs (see DoDI 6055.06 (Reference (h))).

      (3) Support of special events in accordance with applicable laws and DoD policy (see
DoDI 3025.20 (Reference (i))).

       (4) United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) activities as the DoD Coordinating
and Primary Agency for Emergency Support Function #3, Public Works and Engineering, of the
National Response Framework (Reference (j)).

       (5) Defense support to civilian law enforcement agencies (see Reference (c)).

   d. Does NOT apply to the following:

       (1) Support in response to foreign disasters provided in accordance with DoDD 5100.46
(Reference (k)).

        (2) Joint investigations conducted by the Inspector General of the Department of
Defense, the Defense Criminal Investigative Service, and the military criminal investigative
organizations with civil law enforcement agencies on matters within their respective jurisdictions
using their own forces and equipment.

       (3) Detail of DoD personnel to duty outside the Department of Defense in accordance
with DoDI 1000.17 (Reference (l)).

       (4) Counternarcotics operations conducted under the authority of section 284 of
Reference (d).



Change 2, 03/19/2018                             2
                                                             DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010



       (5) Support provided by the USACE when accomplishing missions and responsibilities
under the authority of section 701n of title 33, U.S.C. (Reference (m)) and Executive Order
12656 (Reference (n)).

       (6) Assistance provided by DoD intelligence and counterintelligence components in
accordance with DoDD 5240.01 (Reference (o)), Executive Orders 12333 and 13388
(References (p) and (q)), DoD 5240.1-R (Reference (r)), DoD Manual 5240.01 (Reference (s)),
and other applicable laws and regulations.

        (7) Military community relations programs and activities administered by the Assistant
to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs (see DoDD 5410.18 and DoDI 5410.19
(References (t) and (u))).

       (8) Sensitive support in accordance with DoDD S-5210.36 (Reference (v)).

         (9) Activities performed by the Civil Air Patrol in support of civil authorities or
qualifying entities when approved by the Air Force as auxiliary missions in accordance with
section 9442 of Reference (d) and Volume 1 of DoD Manual 3025.01 (Reference (w)) except as
restricted by paragraph 4.l. above the signature of this Directive.

       (10) Innovative readiness training (formerly called “civil-military cooperative action
programs”) (see DoDD 1100.20 (Reference (x))).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. This Directive shall be implemented consistent with national security objectives and
military readiness.

    b. Unless expressly stated otherwise, the provisions of this Directive should not be construed
to rescind any existing authorities of the Heads of DoD Components, commanders, and/or
responsible DoD civilians to provide DSCA in accordance with existing laws, DoD issuances,
and Secretary of Defense-approved orders.

    c. DSCA is initiated by a request for DoD assistance from civil authorities or qualifying
entities or is authorized by the President or Secretary of Defense.

    d. All requests for DSCA shall be written, and shall include a commitment to reimburse the
Department of Defense in accordance with sections 5121, et. seq., of Reference (g) (also known
as “The Stafford Act”), section 1535 of title 31, U.S.C. (also known as “The Economy Act”
(Reference (y))), or other authorities except requests for support for immediate response, and
mutual or automatic aid, in accordance with paragraphs 4.i. and 4.o. of this section. Unless



Change 2, 03/19/2018                            3
                                                                  DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


approval authority is otherwise delegated by the Secretary of Defense, all DSCA requests shall
be submitted to the office of the Executive Secretary of the Department of Defense. For
assistance provided according to paragraph 4.i of this section, civil authorities shall be informed
that oral requests for assistance in an emergency must be followed by a written request that
includes an offer to reimburse the Department of Defense at the earliest available opportunity.
States also must reimburse the United States Treasury in accordance with section 9701 of
Reference (y). Support may be provided on a non-reimbursable basis only if required by law or
if both authorized by law and approved by the appropriate DoD official.

       e. All requests from civil authorities and qualifying entities for assistance shall be evaluated
for:

          (1) Legality (compliance with laws).

          (2) Lethality (potential use of lethal force by or against DoD Forces).

          (3) Risk (safety of DoD Forces).

          (4) Cost (including the source of funding and the effect on the DoD budget).

      (5) Appropriateness (whether providing the requested support is in the interest of the
Department).

       (6) Readiness (impact on the Department of Defense’s ability to perform its other
primary missions).

    f. In accordance with Presidential Policy Directive 8 (Reference (z)), the Secretary of
Defense, with the heads of other federal departments and agencies with a role in prevention,
protection, mitigation, response, and recovery, are responsible for national preparedness efforts,
including department-specific operational plans, as needed, consistent with their statutory roles
and responsibilities.

    g. DSCA plans shall be compatible with References (j) and (z); the National Incident
Management System (Reference (aa)); all contingency plans for operations in the locations listed
in paragraph 1.d. above the signature of this Directive; and any other national plans (approved by
the President or Secretary of Defense) or DoD issuances governing DSCA operations. DSCA
planning will consider command and control options that will emphasize unity of effort, and
authorize direct liaison if authorized by the Secretary of Defense.

    h. DoD must be prepared to help civilian authorities save and protect lives during a complex
catastrophe (see Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (ab))).

    i. Federal military commanders, Heads of DoD Components, and/or responsible DoD
civilian officials (hereafter referred to collectively as “DoD officials”) have IMMEDIATE
RESPONSE AUTHORITY as described in this Directive. In response to a request for assistance
from a civil authority, under imminently serious conditions and if time does not permit approval



Change 2, 03/19/2018                                 4
                                                               DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


from higher authority, DoD officials may provide an immediate response by temporarily
employing the resources under their control, subject to any supplemental direction provided by
higher headquarters, to save lives, prevent human suffering, or mitigate great property damage
within the United States. Immediate response authority does not permit actions that would
subject civilians to the use of military power that is regulatory, prescriptive, proscriptive, or
compulsory.

        (1) DoD officials must exercise judgment based on available information and resources
in determining the maximum allowable distance from the installation or facility the immediate
response may take place. DoD officials should consider challenges such as sustainment,
transportation, communications, mission impact, and increased risk (see Reference (e)).

        (2) Before responding to a civilian authority’s request for assistance, DoD officials
should, unless otherwise directed by a higher authority, prioritize resources to DoD requirements
first and then to address civilian authority requests.

        (3) The civil authority’s request for immediate response should be directed to the
installation commander or other appropriate DoD official responsible for the installation, with
further dissemination as needed.

       (4) The DoD official directing a response under immediate response authority shall
immediately notify the National Joint Operations and Intelligence Center (NJOIC), through the
DoD organization’s higher headquarters and chain of command, of the details of the response.
The NJOIC will inform the appropriate DoD Components, including the geographic Combatant
Command and the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and
Global Security (ASD(HD&GS)).

        (5) An immediate response shall end when the necessity giving rise to the response is no
longer present (e.g., when there are sufficient resources available from State, local, and other
Federal agencies to respond adequately and that agency or department has initiated response
activities) or when the initiating DoD official or a higher authority directs an end to the response.
The DoD official directing a response under immediate response authority shall reassess whether
there remains a necessity for the Department of Defense to respond under this authority as soon
as practicable but, if immediate response activities have not yet ended, not later than 72 hours
after the request for assistance was received.

       (6) Support provided under immediate response authority should be provided on a cost-
reimbursable basis, where appropriate or legally required, but will not be delayed or denied
based on the inability or unwillingness of the requester to make a commitment to reimburse the
Department of Defense.

    j. The authority of State officials is recognized to direct a State immediate response using
National Guard personnel under State command and control (including personnel in a title 32,
U.S.C. (Reference (f)) (hereafter referred to as “Title 32”) status) in accordance with State law,
but National Guard personnel will not be placed in or extended in Title 32 status to conduct State
immediate response activities.



Change 2, 03/19/2018                              5
                                                               DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010



    k. Federal military commanders are provided EMERGENCY AUTHORITY under this
Directive. Federal military forces shall not be used to quell civil disturbances unless specifically
authorized by the President in accordance with applicable law (e.g., chapter 13 of Reference (d))
or permitted under emergency authority, as described below. In these circumstances, those
Federal military commanders have the authority, in extraordinary emergency circumstances
where prior authorization by the President is impossible and duly constituted local authorities are
unable to control the situation, to engage temporarily in activities that are necessary to quell
large-scale, unexpected civil disturbances because:

       (1) Such activities are necessary to prevent significant loss of life or wanton destruction
of property and are necessary to restore governmental function and public order; or,

        (2) When duly constituted Federal, State, or local authorities are unable or decline to
provide adequate protection for Federal property or Federal governmental functions. Federal
action, including the use of Federal military forces, is authorized when necessary to protect the
Federal property or functions.

    l. Except for immediate response and emergency authority as described in paragraphs 4.i.
and 4.k. of this section, only the Secretary of Defense may approve requests from civil
authorities or qualifying entities for Federal military support for:

       (1) Defense assistance in responding to civil disturbances (requires Presidential
authorization) in accordance with Reference (c).

       (2) Defense response to chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and high-yield
explosives (CBRNE) incidents, except as authorized in paragraph 4.s. of this section.

       (3) Defense assistance to civilian law enforcement organizations, except as authorized in
paragraph 4.s. of this section and Reference (c).

        (4) Assistance in responding with assets with potential for lethality. This support
includes loans of arms; vessels or aircraft; or ammunition. It also includes assistance under
section 282 of Reference (d) and section 831 of title 18, U.S.C. (Reference (ac)); all support to
counterterrorism operations; and all support to civilian law enforcement authorities in situations
where a confrontation between civilian law enforcement and civilian individuals or groups is
reasonably anticipated.

   m. Federal military forces employed for DSCA activities shall remain under Federal military
command and control at all times.

   n. Special event support to a qualifying entity shall be treated as DSCA.

   o. All requests for DSCA mutual and automatic aid via the DoD Fire and Emergency
Services programs shall be in accordance with Reference (h).




Change 2, 03/19/2018                             6
                                                              DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


   p. DSCA is a total force mission (see DoDD 1200.17 (Reference (ad))).

    q. DoD unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) will not be used for DSCA operations, including
support to Federal, State, local, and tribal government organizations, unless expressly approved
by the Secretary of Defense. (See References (o), (p), (q), (r), and (s))

        (1) The only exception to the requirement for approval by the Secretary of Defense for
the use of DoD UAS for DSCA operations is for search and rescue missions involving distress
and potential loss of life that are coordinated by the Air Force Rescue Coordination Center,
Alaska Rescue Coordination Center, or Joint Rescue Coordination Center-Pacific and approved
by the applicable Combatant Commander in accordance with the Deputy Secretary of Defense
Policy Memorandum 15-002 (Reference (ae)).

       (2) Use of armed UAS for DSCA operations is not authorized.

    r. Direct liaison between DoD Components and the States should occur only when time does
not permit compliance with paragraph 13.a. in Enclosure 2 of this Directive. In each such
instance, the Chief, National Guard Bureau, will be informed of the direct liaison.

    s. The ASD(HD&GS) may approve requests for the following types of DoD support of
civilian law enforcement agencies in accordance with the Deputy Secretary of Defense
Memorandum (Reference (af)):

        (1) Non-lethal support that is unrelated to law enforcement functions such as arrest,
search, seizure, or crowd or traffic control.

       (2) Support provided by non-military personnel under section 2564 of Reference (d),
including support contracted by DoD to support civilian law enforcement agencies during certain
sporting events.

        (3) CBRNE detection and response capabilities for pre-planned events, with the
concurrence of the force providers, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other DoD
officials as appropriate.

    t. DoD personnel and National Guard personnel in Title 32 status will not conduct operations
at polling places and must strictly refrain from activities similar to those prohibited by sections
592-594 of Reference (ac).

   u. Use of intelligence assets for DSCA purposes must be in accordance with Reference (o).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Directive is available on the Internet
from the Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD.



Change 2, 03/19/2018                            7
                                                      DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010



7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive effective December 29, 2010.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   Glossary




Change 2, 03/19/2018                      8
                                                                          DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


                                                 ENCLOSURE 1

                                                 REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 3025.1, “Military Support to Civil Authorities (MSCA),” January 15, 1993
      (hereby cancelled)
(b)   DoD Directive 3025.15, “Military Assistance to Civil Authorities,” February 18, 1997
      (hereby cancelled)
(c)   DoD Instruction 3025.21, “Defense Support of Civilian Law Enforcement Agencies,”
      February 27, 2013
(d)   Sections 275, 277, 282, 284, 2564, 9442, and Chapters 13, 15, and 18 of title 10, United
      States Code
(e)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Utilization of Immediate Response Authority
      for Defense Support of Civil Authorities in Complex Catastrophes,” December 9, 2013
      (hereby cancelled)
(f)   Title 32, United States Code
(g)   Sections 300hh-11 and 5121. et. seq.1, and Chapter 15A of title 42, United States Code
(h)   DoD Instruction 6055.06, “DoD Fire and Emergency Services (F&ES) Program,”
      December 21, 2006
(i)   DoD Instruction 3025.20, “Defense Support of Special Events,” April 6, 2012
(j)   Department of Homeland Security, “National Response Framework,” January 2016
(k)   DoD Directive 5100.46, “Foreign Disaster Relief,” July 6, 2012
(l)   DoD Instruction 1000.17, “Detail of DoD Personnel to Duty Outside the Department of
      Defense,” October 30, 2013
(m)   Section 701n of title 33, United States Code
(n)   Executive Order 12656, “Assignment of Emergency Preparedness Responsibilities,” as
      amended
(o)   DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(p)   Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981, as
      amended
(q)   Executive Order 13388, “Further Strengthening the Sharing of Terrorism Information to
      Protect Americans,” October 25, 2005
(r)   DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components
      That Affect United States Persons,” December 1982
(s)   DoD Manual 5240.01, “Procedures Governing the Conduct of DoD Intelligence
      Activities,” August 8, 2016
(t)   DoD Directive 5410.18, “Public Affairs Community Relations Policy,” November 20,
      2001, as amended
(u)   DoD Instruction 5410.19, “Public Affairs Community Relations Policy Implementation,”
      November 13, 2001
(v)   DoD Directive S-5210.36, “Provision of DoD Sensitive Support to DoD Components and
      Other Departments and Agencies of the U.S. Government,” November 6, 2008 2

1
  Section 5121, et. seq., of title 42, U.S.C. Appendix, is also known as “The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and
Emergency Assistance Act,” as amended, and is referred to in this Directive as “The Stafford Act”
2
  Document is classified and copies maybe requested by contacting USD(I), USDI.pubs@osd.mil


Change 2, 03/19/2018                                      9                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                         DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


(w) DoD Manual 3025.01, Volume 1, “Defense Support of Civil Authorities: Overview,”
     August 11, 2016
(x) DoD Directive 1100.20, “Support and Services for Eligible Organizations and Activities
     Outside the Department of Defense,” April 12, 2004
(y) Sections 1535 3 and 9701 of title 31, United States Code
(z) Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-8, “National Preparedness,” March 30, 2011
(aa) Department of Homeland Security, “National Incident Management System,”
     December 2008
(ab) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Actions to Improve Defense Support in Complex
     Catastrophes,” July 20, 2012
(ac) Sections 592-594 and 831 of title 18, United States Code
(ad) DoD Directive 1200.17, “Managing the Reserve Components as an Operational Force,”
     October 29, 2008
(ae) Deputy Secretary of Defense Policy Memorandum 15-002, “Guidance for the Domestic
     Use of Unmanned Aircraft Systems,” February 17, 2015
(af) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegation of Approval Authority,” June 28,
     2016
(ag) DoD Directive 5111.13, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and
     Americas’ Security Affairs (ASD(HD&ASA)),” January 16, 2009
(ah) DoD Instruction 8320.02, “Sharing Data, Information Technology (IT) Services in the
     Department of Defense,” August 5, 2013
(ai) DoD Directive 1322.18, “Military Training,” January 13, 2009
(aj) DoD Instruction 6010.22, “National Disaster Medical System (NDMS),”April 14, 2016
(ak) Unified Command Plan, current edition 4
(al) Global Force Management Implementation Guidance, current edition 5
(am) DoD Instruction 1215.06, “Uniform Reserve, Training, and Retirement Categories,” March
     11, 2014, as amended
(an) DoD Directive 5105.77, “National Guard Bureau (NGB),” October 30, 2015
(ao) Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
     Associated Terms,” current edition




3
  Section 1535 of title 31, U.S.C., is also known as “The Economy Act”
4
  For official use only and on a need-to-know basis, a copy can be requested from the J-5/Joint Staff at 703-693-
2742.
5
  Classified document, a copy can be requested from the J-3/Joint Staff at 703-693-9455.


Change 2, 03/19/2018                                     10                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                             DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall:

   a. Coordinate DSCA policy with other Federal departments and agencies, State agencies,
and the DoD Components, as appropriate.

   b. Establish DoD policy governing DSCA.


2. ASD(HD&GS). The ASD(HD&GS), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P), shall:

  a. Serve as the principal civilian advisor to the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P) for
DSCA.

   b. Serve as the Domestic Crisis Manager.

    c. Serve as an approval authority, subject to the following conditions, for waiver of the
requirement to reimburse DoD, pursuant to section 277 of Reference (d), up to $500,000, for
costs associated with providing support to civilian law enforcement agencies under chapter 15 of
Reference (d), or section 502(f) of Reference (f).

       (1) The reimbursement requirement may only be waived if the support is provided in the
normal course of military training or operations or if the support results in a benefit to DoD or
personnel of the National Guard providing the support that is substantially equivalent to that
which would otherwise be obtained from military operations or training, as determined by the
unit commander or other appropriate authority.

       (2) The following should concur prior to the waiver of reimbursement:

           (a) Relevant Secretaries of the Military Departments.

         (b) Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer of the
Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO).

           (c) General Counsel of the Department of Defense.

           (d) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

           (e) Affected Combatant Commanders.

           (f) Other DoD officials as appropriate.



Change 2, 03/19/2018                           11                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


        (3) The ASD(HD&GS) must notify the Secretary of Defense of the use of this delegated
authority at the earliest opportunity.

    d. As delegated by the Secretary of Defense in accordance with DoDD 5111.13 (Reference
(ah)), serve as approval authority for requests for assistance from civil authorities or qualifying
entities sent to the Secretary of Defense, except for those items retained in paragraphs 4.l., and
4.q. above the signature of this Directive, or delegated to other officials. This authority may not
be delegated further than the Principal Deputy ASD(HD&GS). When carrying out this authority,
the ASD(HD&GS) shall:

        (1) Coordinate requests with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Commanders
of the Combatant Commands with DSCA responsibilities in the matter, and Military Department
Secretaries and other DoD officials as appropriate.

       (2) Immediately notify the Secretary of Defense of the use of this authority.

    e. Develop, coordinate, and oversee the implementation of DoD policy for DSCA plans and
activities, including:

       (1) Requests for assistance during domestic crises, emergencies, or civil disturbances.

       (2) Domestic CBRNE response.

       (3) Coordination or consultation, as appropriate, with the Department of Homeland
Security and other Federal agencies on the development and validation of DSCA requirements.

       (4) DoD support for national special security events.

        (5) DoD support for national and international sporting events, in accordance with
section 2564 of Reference (d).

     (6) Direct the fullest appropriate dissemination of information relating to all aspects of
DSCA, using all approved media and in accordance with DoDI 8320.02 (Reference (ah)).

   f. Exercise staff cognizance over Reference (c).


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW-
INTENSITY CONFLICT (ASD(SO/LIC)). The ASD(SO/LIC), under the authority, direction,
and control of the USD(P), shall support planning by the Domestic Crisis Manager during DSCA
operations, as required.


4. USD(C)/CFO. The USD(C)/CFO shall:




Change 2, 03/19/2018                            12                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


   a. Establish policies and procedures to ensure timely reimbursement to the Department of
Defense for reimbursable DSCA activities.

    b. Assist in management of statutory resources for DSCA in support of appropriate
international and domestic sporting events.


5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall identify, monitor, and oversee the development of
integrated DSCA training capabilities and the integration of these training capabilities into
exercises and training to build, sustain, and assess DSCA readiness in accordance with DoDD
1322.18 (Reference (ai)).


6. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)). The
ASD(HA), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), as the principal advisor
to the Secretary of Defense for all DoD health policy, shall:

   a. Provide guidance and support for all domestic crisis situations or emergencies that require
health or medical-related DSCA to the ASD(HD&GS).

   b. Exercise authority in accordance with section 300hh-11 of Reference (g), and the policy
according to DoDI 6010.22 (Reference (aj)), for participation in the National Disaster Medical
System.


7. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
(ASD(M&RA)). The ASD(M&RA), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), shall provide recommendations, guidance, and support on the use of the Reserve
Components to perform DSCA missions to the ASD(HD&GS).


8. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION AND SUSTAINMENT
(USD(A&S)). The USD(A&S) shall establish policies and procedures, in coordination with the
ASD(HD&GS), to implement DSCA requirements for DoD Fire and Emergency Services
programs and mutual or automatic aid that may be part of that program.


9. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

    a. Direct that any DSCA-related DoD issuances, concept plans, interagency agreements, and
memorandums of understanding or agreement with external agencies are in full compliance with
this Directive.




Change 2, 03/19/2018                           13                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


    b. Direct Component compliance with financial management guidance related to support
provided for DSCA operations, including guidance related to tracking costs and seeking
reimbursement.

   c. When approved by the Secretary of Defense, plan, program, and budget for DSCA
capabilities in accordance with law, policy, and assigned missions.


10. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Establish the necessary policies and procedures to ensure the appropriate personnel are
trained to execute DSCA plans as directed by the Secretary of Defense.

   b. Direct that requests for reimbursement of actual DSCA expenditures (performance of
work or services, payments to contractors, or delivery from inventory) begin within 30 calendar
days after the month in which performance occurred. Final billing invoices shall be submitted to
supported departments and agencies within 90 calendar days of the termination of the supported
event.

     c. In coordination with the relevant geographic Combatant Commander, direct relevant DoD
officials under that Secretary’s supervision, direction, and control to take appropriate actions to
share information on DSCA capabilities with civil authorities at all levels. DoD officials should
share information prior to need, when appropriate, to facilitate requests for assistance, including
under immediate response authority, when a need arises. This capability information should not
list specific units or assets.


11. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Advise the Secretary of Defense on the effects of requests for DSCA on national security
and military readiness.

   b. Identify available resources for support in response to DSCA requests, and release related
orders when approved by the Secretary of Defense.
   c. Incorporate DSCA into joint training and exercise programs in consultation with the
USD(P&R), the Chief, National Guard Bureau (NGB), and appropriate officials from the
Department of Homeland Security and other appropriate Federal departments and agencies.

   d. Advocate for needed DSCA capabilities.

12. COMMANDERS OF COMBATANT COMMANDS WITH DSCA RESPONSIBILITIES.
The Commanders of Combatant Commands with DSCA responsibilities, in addition to the
responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure and in accordance with the Unified Command Plan
(Reference (ak)), shall:



Change 2, 03/19/2018                            14                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010



    a. In coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, plan and execute DSCA
operations in their areas of responsibility in accordance with this Directive, Reference (ak), and
the Global Force Management Implementation Guidance (Reference (al)).

    b. In coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, incorporate DSCA into
joint training and exercise programs in consultation with the Department of Homeland Security,
other appropriate Federal departments and agencies, and the NGB.

   c. Advocate for needed DSCA capabilities and requirements through the Joint Requirements
Oversight Council, subject to paragraph 9.c. of this enclosure, and the planning, programming,
budgeting, and execution process.

    d. Work closely with subordinate commands to ensure that they are appropriately
reimbursed for DSCA in accordance with paragraph 10.b. of this enclosure.

   e. Exercise Training Readiness Oversight (TRO) over assigned Reserve Component forces
when not on active duty or when on active duty for training in accordance with DoDI 1215.06
(Reference (am)).

    f. In coordination with the relevant Secretaries of the Military Departments, direct relevant
DoD officials under Combatant Commander supervision, direction, and control to take
appropriate actions to share information on DSCA capabilities with civil authorities at all levels.
DoD officials should share information prior to need, when appropriate, to facilitate requests for
assistance, including under immediate response authority, when a need arises. This capability
information should not list specific units or assets.


13. CHIEF, NGB. The Chief, NGB, under the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary
of Defense, consistent with paragraphs 5a, 5b, and 5c of DoDD 5105.77 (Reference (an)),and in
addition to the responsibilities in Reference (ao), shall:

    a. Annually assess the readiness of the National Guard of the States to conduct DSCA
activities and report on this assessment to the Secretaries of the Army and the Air Force; the
USD(P&R), ASD(HD&GS), and ASD(M&RA); and, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, to the Secretary of Defense and appropriate Combatant Commanders.

   b. Report National Guard support of civil authorities or qualifying entities when using
Federal resources, equipment, and/or funding to the NJOIC.


    c. Ensure that National Guard appropriations are appropriately reimbursed for DSCA
activities.




Change 2, 03/19/2018                            15                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                           DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


     d. Develop and promulgate, in accordance with Reference (an) and in coordination with the
Secretaries of the Army and Air Force and the ASD(HD&GS), guidance regarding this Directive
as it relates to National Guard matters.




Change 2, 03/19/2018                          16                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


                                           GLOSSARY


                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(HA)                 Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs
ASD(HD&GS)              Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
                        Security
ASD(M&RA)               Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
ASD(SO/LIC&IC)          Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-
                        Intensity Conflict

CBRNE                   chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and high yield explosives

DoDD                    DoD Directive
DoDI                    DoD Instruction
DSCA                    Defense Support of Civil Authorities

NGB                     National Guard Bureau
NJOIC                   National Joint Operations and Intelligence Center

TRO                     Training Readiness Oversight

UAS                     unmanned aircraft systems
USACE                   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
U.S.C.                  United States Code
USD(A&S)                Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
USD(C)/CFO              Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                        Department of Defense
USD(I)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)                Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS


Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

civil authorities. Defined in the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference
(ao)).

civil disturbances. Defined in Reference (ao).

complex catastrophe. Defined in Reference (ao).



Change 2, 03/19/2018                             17                                  GLOSSARY
                                                                DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


direct liaison. An authority for Federal military forces to consult with, coordinate with, and
respond to State authorities (including National Guard units and personnel operating in Title 32
status or in State Active Duty status) or Federal civilian authorities in the tactical-level execution
of assigned tasks, pursuant to an order by the Secretary of Defense or the President to provide
support to those authorities.

DoD Domestic Crisis Manager. The lead DoD official responsible for DoD’s domestic crisis
management response, ensuring the information needs and other requirements of the Secretary of
Defense are met, and developing, coordinating, and overseeing the implementation of DoD
policy for crisis management to ensure DoD capability to develop and execute options to
prevent, mitigate, or respond to a potential or actual domestic crisis. The ASD(HD&GS) serves
as the Defense Domestic Crisis Manager.

DSCA. Support provided by U.S. Federal military forces, DoD civilians, DoD contract
personnel, DoD Component assets, and National Guard forces (when the Secretary of Defense,
in coordination with the Governors of the affected States, elects and requests to use those forces
in title 32, U.S.C., status) in response to requests for assistance from civil authorities for
domestic emergencies, law enforcement support, and other domestic activities, or from
qualifying entities for special events.

emergency authority. A Federal military commander’s authority, in extraordinary emergency
circumstances where prior authorization by the President is impossible and duly constituted local
authorities are unable to control the situation, to engage temporarily in activities that are
necessary to quell large-scale, unexpected civil disturbances because 1) such activities are
necessary to prevent significant loss of life or wanton destruction of property and are necessary
to restore governmental function and public order or (2) duly constituted Federal, State, or local
authorities are unable or decline to provide adequate protection for Federal property or Federal
governmental functions.

Federal military forces. Army, Navy, Marine Corps and Air Force personnel (including Reserve
Component personnel) on Federal active duty and National Guard personnel when under Federal
command and control.

immediate response authority. A Federal military commander’s, DoD Component Head’s,
and/or responsible DoD civilian official’s authority temporarily to employ resources under their
control, subject to any supplemental direction provided by higher headquarters, and provide
those resources to save lives, prevent human suffering, or mitigate great property damage in
response to a request for assistance from a civil authority, under imminently serious conditions
when time does not permit approval from a higher authority within the United States. Immediate
response authority does not permit actions that would subject civilians to the use of military
power that is regulatory, prescriptive, proscriptive, or compulsory. (State immediate response is
addressed in paragraph 4.j. above the signature of this Directive.)

qualifying entity. A non-Governmental organization to which the Department of Defense may
provide assistance for special events by virtue of statute.




Change 2, 03/19/2018                              18                                   GLOSSARY
                                                              DoDD 3025.18, December 29, 2010


responsible DoD civilian. For purposes of DSCA, the Head of a DoD Component or other DoD
civilian official who has authority over DoD assets that may be used for a DSCA response.

special event. An international or domestic event, contest, activity, or meeting, which by its very
nature, or by specific statutory or regulatory authority, may warrant security, safety, and/or other
logistical support or assistance from the Department of Defense.

total force. Defined in Reference (ad).

UAS. Defined in Reference (ao).




Change 2, 03/19/2018                            19                                   GLOSSARY
