                             Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE
                                                                           NUMBER 5100.46
                                                                                   July 6, 2012
                                                          Incorporating Change 1, July 28, 2017

                                                                                         USD(P)

SUBJECT: Foreign Disaster Relief (FDR)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive reissues DoD Directive 5100.46 (Reference (a)) to update DoD
policy and responsibilities for FDR operations in accordance with sections 404 and 2561 of title
10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (b)) and Executive Order (E.O.) 12966
(Reference (c)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities in the DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD
Components”).

    b. Does not apply to DoD policy concerning foreign consequence management for chemical,
biological, radiological, nuclear, or high-yield explosive incidents, which is governed by DoD
Instruction 2000.21 (Reference (d)).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. DoD shall respond to foreign disasters in support of the U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID) pursuant to E.O. 12163 and section 2292(b) of title 22, U.S.C.
(References (e) and (f)).

   b. In accordance with Reference (c), DoD Components shall provide disaster assistance in
support of U.S. FDR efforts only:
                                                                      DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012



       (1) At the direction of the President;

       (2) When the Secretary of Defense or a designee approves, with the concurrence of the
Secretary of State, a request for assistance from another Federal department or agency; or

        (3) In emergency situations in order to save human lives, where there is not sufficient
time to seek the prior concurrence of the Secretary of State, in which case the Secretary of
Defense shall advise and seek the concurrence of the Secretary of State as soon as practicable
thereafter.

    c. In accordance with paragraph 4.b. of this section, DoD Components may provide non-
reimbursable FDR as humanitarian assistance pursuant to Reference (b) using available Overseas
Humanitarian, Disaster, and Civic Aid (OHDACA) funds, Presidential drawdown authority in
accordance with section 506 of Public Law 87-195 (Reference (g)), or other available authorities.
Additionally, DoD Components may provide reimbursable FDR assistance when requested and
funded by other U.S. Government (USG) departments and agencies.

    d. Interagency requests for DoD assistance to disaster relief efforts shall be transmitted in an
official request from the appropriate departmental or agency Executive Secretariat to the DoD
Executive Secretary. In exigent circumstances when an interagency request was made orally and
then approved orally by the Secretary of Defense, at the earliest opportunity the requesting
agency must document the oral request with a written request to the DoD Executive Secretary.

    e. DoD shall consider FDR assistance requests from USAID, the Department of State, and
other Federal departments and agencies based on USG and/or appropriate international
organization assessment(s) of the disaster, the availability of requested assistance, the impact on
ongoing or potential military operations of providing such assistance, the effect on security
cooperation objectives, and other relevant factors associated with DoD involvement.

    f. Nothing in this Directive shall be construed as preventing a military commander with
assigned forces at or near the immediate scene of a foreign disaster from taking prompt action to
save human lives. In cases in which this authority is invoked, the commander should obtain the
concurrence of the host nation and U.S. Chief of Mission of the affected country before
committing forces. Also, the Combatant Commander shall follow up as soon as possible, but no
later than 72 hours after the start of relief operations, to secure Secretary of Defense or Deputy
Secretary of Defense approval for continuing assistance. Combatant Commanders must also
obtain Secretary or Deputy Secretary approval in order to obtain reimbursement with OHDACA
funds. Such assistance during the first 72 hours does not include the authority to provide
military assistance that does not contribute to urgent life-saving efforts.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                             2
                                                                DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and updates
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective July 6, 2012.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 07/28/2017                        3
                                                                DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5100.46, “Foreign Disaster Relief,” December 4, 1975 (hereby cancelled)
(b) Sections 404 and 2561 of title 10, United States Code
(c) Executive Order 12966, “Foreign Disaster Assistance,” July 14, 1995
(d) DoD Instruction 2000.21, “DoD Support to International Chemical, Biological,
    Radiological, and Nuclear (CBRN) Events,” April 5, 2016
(e) Executive Order 12163, “Administration of Foreign Assistance and Related Functions,”
    September 29, 1979, as amended
(f) Section 2292(b) of title 22, United States Code
(g) Section 506 of Public Law 87-195, “The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,” September 4,
    1961, as amended
(h) DoD Directive 3020.44, “Defense Crisis Management,” June 4, 2007, as amended
(i) DoD Financial Management Regulation 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial
    Management Regulation,” Volume 12, date varies by volume
(j) Part 060 of Volume 2, U.S. Department of State Foreign Affairs Manual, “Foreign Disaster
    Emergency Relief,” April 1, 1991




Change 1, 07/28/2017                         4                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012


                                       ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall:

   a. Coordinate FDR policy with DoD Components and other Federal departments and
agencies, as appropriate.

   b. Establish DoD policy governing FDR.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW-
INTENSITY CONFLICT (ASD(SO/LIC)). The ASD(SO/LIC), under the authority, direction,
and control of the USD(P), shall:

    a. Serve as the principal advisor to the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P) on all DoD
FDR efforts and keep them informed of all DoD actions taken in response to foreign disasters,
regardless of scope.

   b. Develop policies for DoD participation in FDR operations; and prescribe procedures for
implementation of this Directive.

    c. Assess the overall effectiveness of DoD FDR policies and procedures and of DoD
assistance in support of the entire spectrum of USG FDR operations; ensure that lessons learned
from FDR operations are incorporated into future planning efforts.

    d. Coordinate DoD FDR operations and policies with USAID, the Department of State, and
other involved Federal departments and agencies; promote FDR collaboration among these
departments and agencies.

    e. Represent the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P) in discussions on FDR policy,
strategy, and operations with other U.S. departments and agencies, including USAID, and with
foreign governments, international organizations (IOs), non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), and members of the private sector.

   f. In collaboration with the Director, Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA), when
appropriate, prepare and disseminate FDR guidance that includes implementation procedures.

   g. Advise the Secretary of Defense and USD(P) on the use of DoD resources in specific
FDR operations, including in response to Presidential directives or requests from USAID, the
Department of State, or the Combatant Commanders.

   h. Obtain Secretary of Defense authorization and guidance for Combatant Commands to
conduct FDR operations. Factors to consider in preparing guidance include:



Change 1, 07/28/2017                           5                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012



       (1) The capacity of the host nation and international aid community to respond.

      (2) The magnitude of the disaster and assessment of emergency needs, including the
number of fatalities, number of internally displaced people, and level of damage to infrastructure.

       (3) Other USG or international donor responses.

       (4) Validation of need by USAID.

       (5) The level of DoD resources required to provide assistance in support of the relief
operation and competing operational demands on DoD resources.

    i. Advise the Secretary of Defense and USD(P) on providing transportation for FDR,
including emergency transportation of non-DoD personnel (e.g., relief personnel from other USG
agencies or NGOs, IOs, and foreign governments), and of non-USG relief supplies,
commodities, items, and equipment on DoD-owned or DoD-controlled aircraft when the requests
are related to approved DoD FDR efforts. This advice should include a recommendation on
whether the transportation should be provided on a reimbursable or non-reimbursable basis.


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND DEFENSE AND GLOBAL
SECURITY (ASD(HD&GS)). The ASD(HD&GS), under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(P), shall:

    a. Provide crisis management support for DoD FDR operations by managing information for
the DoD Components, including producing, coordinating, and disseminating classified and
unclassified situation, summary, and other reports as required by the situation and ensuring that
information needs and other requirements of the Secretary of Defense are met in accordance with
DoD Directive 3020.44 (Reference (h)).

    b. Support DoD FDR operations in the ASD(HD&GS)’s assigned geographic area and lead
OSD’s engagement with foreign nations in its assigned geographic area throughout all phases of
the disaster.


4. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS
(ASD(ISA)). The ASD(ISA), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), shall
support DoD FDR operations in the ASD(ISA)’s assigned geographic area and lead OSD’s
engagement with foreign nations in its assigned geographic area throughout all phases of the
disaster.


5. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ASIAN AND PACIFIC SECURITY
AFFAIRS (ASD(APSA)). The ASD(APSA), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P), shall support DoD FDR operations in the ASD(APSA)’s assigned geographic area and



Change 1, 07/28/2017                            6                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012


lead OSD’s engagement with foreign nations in its assigned geographic area throughout all
phases of the disaster.


6. DIRECTOR, DSCA. The Director, DSCA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P)), shall serve as the DoD lead for FDR program management and budget issues, and in
that capacity shall:

   a. Provide program management oversight by ensuring DoD response activities are
appropriate, coordinated, and resourced in accordance with policy guidance.

    b. Identify and report to the ASD(SO/LIC) and the Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO) the estimated
costs associated with potential DoD FDR operations and the DoD costs and resources committed
to each FDR operation.

     c. Ensure that DoD OHDACA funding is used according to sections 404 and 2561 of
Reference (b) and DoD Financial Management Regulation 7000.14-R, Volume 12 (Reference
(i)).

   d. As necessary, request, implement, and monitor DoD FDR-related drawdown authorities.

   e. Coordinate with the USD(C)/CFO to:

      (1) Identify anticipated future requirements for funds or resources to support potential
FDR operations.

       (2) Convey to the ASD(SO/LIC) estimates provided by the Combatant Commanders and
the Secretaries of the Military Departments regarding any additional funds that will be required
to complete authorized relief operations.

        (3) Issue additional funds, as provided, to the implementing DoD Components through
established funding channels.

   f. Represent the Secretary of Defense, through the ASD(SO/LIC), in budget and program
management-related discussions on FDR operations and execution with other U.S. departments
and agencies, including USAID, and with foreign governments (in coordination with the
appropriate Assistant Secretary of Defense, IOs, NGOs, and members of the private sector.


7. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (GC DoD). The GC DoD,
shall review and assess all potential DoD FDR operations for compliance with applicable law.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                            7                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012


8. ASSISTANT TO THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS (ATSD(PA)).
The ATSD(PA) shall issue policy and guidance to the DoD Components for public affairs issues
and activities associated with FDR efforts in the context of the overall USG response.


9. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS (ASD(LA)).
The ASD(LA) shall issue policy and guidance to the DoD Components for legislative affairs
issues and activities associated with FDR efforts in the context of the overall USG response.


10. USD(C)/CFO. The USD(C)/CFO shall collaborate with the Director, DSCA, to:

   a. Ensure appropriate OHDACA funding is available for DoD to meet its requirements to
provide FDR assistance.

   b. Secure additional resources should a disaster relief operation require funding beyond
available OHDACA funds.


11. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

   a. Organize, train, and equip forces capable of conducting FDR in support of USG efforts.

    b. Provide the Director, DSCA, cost estimates associated with potential participation in FDR
activities.


12. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:

    a. Communicate approved requests for disaster relief assistance and funding authorization to
the relevant Combatant Commander.

    b. In situations where a military commander undertakes prompt action in order to save
human lives in accordance with paragraph 4.f., ensure that OSD is informed as soon as possible,
but no later than 72 hours after the start of relief operations, of:

       (1) Any actions taken by a Combatant Commander in response to the disaster.

       (2) The threat the disaster presents to U.S. forces or assets in the theater.

       (3) The U.S. military personnel or material resources involved or expected to be
involved in providing assistance.

       (4) The expected duration of FDR operations.



Change 1, 07/28/2017                             8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012



       (5) Other pertinent disaster-related information applicable to USG entities.

   c. Develop planning guidance for Combatant Command participation in FDR operations;
ensure Combatant Commander compliance with that guidance and this Directive.


13. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:

   a. Inform the ASD(SO/LIC) of any actions taken in response to a foreign disaster, including
exercising prompt action to save human lives in accordance with paragraph 4f. Provide situation
and after-action reports for all FDR actions.

    b. Provide the ASD(SO/LIC) with analyses of capabilities and proposed courses of action
for participation in FDR activities in support of validated requirements; provide the Director,
DSCA, with associated cost estimates.


14. COMMANDER, UNITED STATES TRANSPORTATION COMMAND
(USTRANSCOM). The Commander, USTRANSCOM, in addition to the responsibilities in
section 13 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Ensure that DoD activities that support FDR transportation requirements, including the
Air Mobility Command, Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command, and Military
Sealift Command, provide efficient global mobility, as appropriate, during Secretary of Defense
approved FDR operations.

  b. Provide responsive support for transportation of approved non-DoD personnel and non-
DoD cargo.

   c. Report estimated and actual costs to the appropriate geographic Combatant Command
comptroller for inclusion in FDR cost reports.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                            9                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012


                                              GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ASD(APSA)           Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Security Affairs
ASD(HD&GS)          Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
                    Security
ASD(ISA)            Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
ASD(LA)             Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs
ATSD(PA)            Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
ASD(SO/LIC)         Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity
                    Conflict

DSCA                Defense Security Cooperation Agency

E.O.                Executive order

FDR                 foreign disaster relief

GC, DoD             General Counsel of the Department of Defense

IO                  international organization

NGO                 non-governmental organization

OHDACA              Overseas Humanitarian, Disaster, and Civic Aid

USAID      U. S. Agency for International Development
U.S.C.     United States Code
USD(C)/CFO Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
           Department of Defense
USD(P)     Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USG        U.S. Government
USTRANSCOM United States Transportation Command


                                      PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

FDR. Assistance that can be used immediately to alleviate the suffering of foreign disaster
victims. Normally, it includes services and commodities as well as the rescue and evacuation of
victims; the provision and transportation of food, water, clothing, medicines, beds, and bedding,
temporary shelter, the furnishing of medical equipment, medical and technical personnel; and




Change 1, 07/28/2017                             10                                GLOSSARY
                                                                       DoDD 5100.46, July 6, 2012


making repairs to essential services. This term is equivalent to “emergency relief” as defined in
part 060 of Volume 2, U.S. Department of State Foreign Affairs Manual (Reference (j)).

foreign disaster. A calamitous situation or event that occurs naturally (such as earthquakes,
storms, droughts, volcanic eruptions, wild-fires) or through human activities (such as industrial
explosions or fires, civil strife, infectious disease), which threatens or inflicts human suffering on
a scale that may warrant emergency relief assistance from the USG or from foreign partners.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                             11                                   GLOSSARY
