                              Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 3115.15
                                                                                December 6, 2011
                                                Incorporating Change 2, Effective October 1, 2020

                                                                                         USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:      Geospatial Intelligence (GEOINT)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

   a. Establishes policies, assigns responsibilities, and provides guidance for GEOINT
operations within the DoD in accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01
(Reference (a)) and DoDD 5105.60 (Reference (b)).

   b. Incorporates and cancels DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5210.52 (Reference (c)).

    c. Conforms to and is consistent with law and Executive order, including the authorities and
responsibilities of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) in section 403 of title 50, United
States Code (Reference (d)) and Executive Order 12333 (Reference (e)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the DoD, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and
all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereinafter referred to collectively
as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. GEOINT operations and activities shall be treated as high priority efforts and conducted in
a unified and synchronized manner, due to the vital role GEOINT plays in the successful conduct
of military operations and activities, in executing the mission of the DoD, and in supporting
national security.
                                                               DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011



     b. Guidance to the National System for GEOINT (NSG) and operation of a unified
community for GEOINT activities and capabilities, in accordance with Reference (b), shall be
provided by the Director, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA), acting concurrently
as the DoD GEOINT Manager and as the GEOINT Functional Manager pursuant to Reference
(e).

   c. GEOINT conducted under the authority of the Secretary of Defense shall comply with the
NSG strategic guidance, policies, and procedures issued by the Director, NGA, acting
concurrently as the DoD GEOINT Manager and as the GEOINT Functional Manager.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and
Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (f)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective December 6, 2011.




                                                Michael G. Vickers
                                                Under Secretary of Defense
                                                for Intelligence

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 2, 10/01/2020                            2
                                                                                   DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


                                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                                      REFERENCES


(a)    DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
       (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(b)    DoD Directive 5105.60, “National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA),” July 29, 2009
(c)    DoD Instruction 5210.52, “Security Classification of Airborne Sensor Imagery and Imaging
       Systems,” May 18, 1989 (hereby cancelled)
(d)    Section 403 of title 50, United States Code
(e)    Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981,
       as amended
(f)    Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
       December 20, 2019
(g)    DoD Directive 5205.12, “Military Intelligence Program (MIP),” November 14, 2008, as
       amended
(h)    Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3901.01C, “Requirements for Geospatial
       Information and Services,” April 10, 2010 1
(i)    Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Message, DTG 031640ZAPR06, “Joint Intelligence
       Operations Center Execute Order (U)” 2
(j)    DoD Instruction 5030.59, “National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) Limited
       Distribution Geospatial Intelligence (GEOINT),” March 10, 2015, as amended
(k)    Executive Order 13556, “Controlled Unclassified Information,” November 4, 2010
(l)    DoD Directive 5230.11, “Disclosure of Classified Military Information to Foreign
       Governments and International Organizations,” June 16, 1992
(m)    DoD Instruction 5000.56, “Programming Geospatial-Intelligence (GEOINT), Geospatial
       Information and Services (GI&S), and Geodesy Requirements for Developing Systems,”
       July 9, 2010, as amended
(n)    DoD Instruction 3305.10, “DoD Geospatial Intelligence (GEOINT) Training,”
       July 3, 2013, as amended
(o)    DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components that
       Affect United States Persons,” December 1982, as amended
(p)    DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(q)    Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3340.02, “Horizontal Integration of
       Warfighter Intelligence,” December 23, 2005
(r)    DoD Directive 5105.65, “Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA),”
       October 26, 2012




1 This Instruction is approved for limited release.Authorized users may obtain copies of this Instruction through controlled
Internet access only (.mil and .gov users) from http://www.dtic.mil/cjcs_directives.
2 On a need-to-know basis, a copy can be requested from the J-2/Joint Staff at 703-614-7816. This is a classified document and

is not releasable to the public.


Change 2, 10/01/2020                                           3                                  ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(I&S). The USD(I&S), in accordance with Reference (a), shall:

   a. Exercise oversight of DoD GEOINT policy, plans, and programs.

    b. Promote alignment of Intelligence Community (IC) and DoD policies for GEOINT
classification, foreign disclosure, release, and dissemination.

    c. Oversee the GEOINT-related activities of DoD Components within the Military
Intelligence Program (MIP) in accordance with DoDD 5205.12 (Reference (g)) and ensure
alignment of DoD GEOINT-related activities with the National Intelligence Program (NIP)
efforts in accordance with Reference (e).

    d. Oversee the NGA MIP pursuant to Reference (g) and coordinate the National Geospatial
Intelligence Program (NGP) budget with the DNI.


2. DIRECTOR, NGA. The Director, NGA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I&S), in addition to the responsibilities in section 7 of this enclosure, and in accordance
with Reference (b), shall:

    a. Prioritize and implement activities necessary for timely, relevant, and accurate GEOINT;
to protect intelligence sources and methods; to support operations according to tasking priorities
and timeliness standards assigned by the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, and the Commanders of the Combatant Commands; and to support the requirements
defined in Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3901.01C (Reference (h)).

   b. Collect, process, analyze, produce, and disseminate GEOINT according to the objectives,
requirements, and priorities established by the Secretary of Defense, the DNI, the Joint Staff, and
Reference (e) for purposes including foreign intelligence and counterintelligence.

    c. Respond, as required, to GEOINT-related requirements to support DoD Components, to
include planning, operations, requests for technical information, and other support, as required.

   d. Provide direct support to the Combatant Commands’ Joint Intelligence Operations
Centers (JIOCs), Service Intelligence Centers, and Defense Agencies in accordance with the
Secretary of Defense guidance in Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) Message
conveying the JIOC Execute Order (Reference (i)).

    e. Oversee GEOINT tasking-related activities of the NSG to respond most effectively to
military and other GEOINT requirements to:




Change 2, 10/01/2020                             4                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


       (1) Provide advisory tasking through the Defense Collection Manager for assets under
the operational control of a military commander to fulfill GEOINT requirements.

     (2) Coordinate guidance with the Director, DIA, for dissemination so that the resulting
GEOINT is provided to the designated office or activity as soon as possible.

        (3) Apprise the JIOCs of all GEOINT-related activity relevant to each organization’s
respective responsibilities.

        (4) Provide technical advice and support to the Defense Collection Manager in
determining when higher priority national GEOINT requirements cannot be met by other than
theater-assigned assets.

    f. Establish procedures to comply with national overhead GEOINT reconnaissance
collection policies.

    g. Lead the evaluation of all available GEOINT sources, including foreign, to identify the
current and future technical, analytic, and mission value.

   h. Establish the guidance and governance framework for the GEOINT mission in accordance
with the DoD, including Joint Staff policies and guidance, to:

       (1) Provide technical guidance for the tasking, collection, production, exploitation,
dissemination, foreign disclosure and release, retention, and archiving of GEOINT.

       (2) Establish analytic and production programs to coordinate and collaborate within the
NSG, ensuring maximum information sharing and the most effective and efficient GEOINT
products and services.

   i. Coordinate the management of GEOINT activities through the established GEOINT
governance framework, while retaining overall responsibility and accountability.

    j. Control unclassified NGA GEOINT information in compliance with DoDI 5030.59
(Reference (j)), Executive Order 13556 (Reference (k)), and implementing DoD policies.
Provide guidance for handling controlled unclassified GEOINT under the control and possession
of the DoD.

   k. Execute foreign disclosure and release responsibilities for national, DoD, and commercial
GEOINT as delegated.

   l. Publish consolidated instructions for active theater airborne and operational satellite
missions to include:

      (1) Coordinating with the appropriate Combatant Command Foreign Disclosure Officer
(FDO) to determine baseline operating conditions and requirements for the specific mission.

       (2) Basing the classification level of airborne GEOINT on the parameters of the security


Change 2, 10/01/2020                             5                           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


classification guide for the employed sensor, as well as the exigencies of the specific mission.

       (3) In compliance with DoDD 5230.11 (Reference (l)), determining the foreign
disclosure and release parameters for GEOINT collected by DoD theater assets under advisory
tasking.

        (4) Receiving the Combatant Command FDO’s determination of the foreign disclosure
and release parameters for GEOINT that is collected by DoD theater assets for theater airborne
missions for inclusion in mission consolidated instructions.

    m. Standardize GEOINT equipment, applications, processes, and facilities to maximize
interoperability, and eliminate unwarranted duplication of GEOINT efforts, where practical, in
coordination with the DoD Components.

   n. As the Component Manager for the NGA MIP, pursuant to Reference (g), and as the
Program Manager for the NGP as directed by the DNI, shall:

       (1) Manage assigned GEOINT resources, personnel, and programs.

       (2) Prepare resource investment plans, program budget guidance, and consolidated NGA
MIP and NGP program and budget submissions to the USD(I&S) and DNI, in accordance with
Reference (g).

      (3) Coordinate, assess, and deconflict GEOINT resource requirements between the NGA
MIP and the NGP. Report issues and conflicts to the USD(I&S) and the DNI for resolution.

      (4) Provide DNI and USD(I&S) with current and proposed plans, programs, and costs of
the GEOINT activities under Director, NGA, control.

       (5) Review the Military Departments’ and Combatant Commands’ GEOINT investment
programs, and provide guidance to them as appropriate, as a part of the process of requirements,
planning, programming, and budgeting in accordance with MIP guidance issued by USD(I&S)
pursuant to Reference (g). Review, as appropriate, the Military Departments’ and Combatant
Commands’ GEOINT investment programs, as a part of the process of acquisition in accordance
with DoDI 5000.56 (Reference (m)).

       (6) Provide DoD Components with planned and current GEOINT program details for the
NSG.

       (7) Inform the USD(I&S) and the DNI of the state of GEOINT investment, including
budget shortfalls and unfulfilled requirements.

   o. Conduct GEOINT research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) to meet the
needs of the DoD to:

       (1) Provide advice, assistance, and guidance to DoD Components regarding GEOINT



Change 2, 10/01/2020                             6                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


investments in technologies, programs, and product support in accordance with DoD policy and
in coordination with the Military Departments and the IC.

       (2) Provide technical advice, assistance, and guidance to the Military Departments and
the Combatant Commands for tactical GEOINT investment programs to ensure interoperability
between existing and future Military Department and Combatant Command GEOINT systems,
connectivity between national and tactical systems, and modernization of systems.

     (3) Advise other DoD Components and, as appropriate, IC components concerning
GEOINT investment activities, techniques, procedures, and procurements resulting from
GEOINT and GEOINT-related RDT&E programs.

   p. In addition to the responsibilities for DoD GEOINT training assigned by DoDI 3305.10
(Reference (n)), develop and conduct GEOINT training to meet the needs of the NSG to:

       (1) Provide guidance to the DoD Components for military and civilian GEOINT career
development and training programs and conduct, or otherwise provide for, necessary specialized
and advanced GEOINT training.

        (2) Maintain and operate the National Geospatial-Intelligence College as the GEOINT
training center for NGA and other organizations within the NSG. Oversee GEOINT centers,
which provide GEOINT training to military, government, and civilian producers and consumers
of GEOINT through coordination councils and forums.

    q. Oversee the validation and prioritization of the NSG Geospatial Data Production Plan for
the DoD, in accordance with Reference (h), as the co-chair of the Foundation Data Requirements
Subcommittee (FRSCOM), which is delegated to the Foundation Based Operations NSG
Executive.

  r. Confirm the integration of GEOINT standards and architectures in DoD GEOINT and
GEOINT-related systems.

    s. Develop and coordinate the international acquisition and engagement strategy, including
use of facilities and information sharing, and negotiate the international agreements needed for
GEOINT exchange and cooperation with foreign partners. Nothing in this paragraph shall limit
the authority of a DoD Component to conduct foreign liaison relationships as authorized by law,
regulation, or Executive order.

    t. Provide NSG members with visibility into the plans, programs, and costs of the GEOINT
activities of the National Geospatial Intelligence Program within the NIP and the NGA MIP.

   u. Issue guidance to Defense Intelligence Components on proper use memorandums for
domestic collection of tactical imagery consistent with DoD 5240.1-R (Reference (o)).




Change 2, 10/01/2020                           7                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


3. DIRECTOR, NATIONAL RECONNAISSANCE OFFICE (NRO). The Director, NRO,
under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S) and in addition to the responsibilities
in section 7 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Research, develop, acquire, deploy, operate, and maintain overhead GEOINT collection
systems and related infrastructure to meet DoD and IC requirements in response to validated
requirements from the DNI and the Director, NGA.

    b. Provide systems architectural-related recommendations to the DNI, in coordination with
the Director, NGA, for sound acquisition decisions in relation to current and future space-borne
GEOINT systems architecture.

    c. Coordinate with the Director, NGA, to develop and provide interoperable GEOINT data
to support intelligence needs.


4. DIRECTOR, DIA. The Director, DIA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I&S) and in addition to the responsibilities in section 7 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Coordinate with the Director, NGA, to develop and provide integrated GEOINT and DoD
human intelligence, counterintelligence, and measurement and signature intelligence activities,
as needed.

   b. As the Defense Collection Manager, pursuant to DoD Directive 5105.21 (Reference (p)):

        (1) Through the Commander, United States Strategic Command, coordinate approval
from the Secretary of Defense to assign collection requirements to theater imaging assets, when
appropriate. Communicate with the Director, NGA, for technical advice and direction to effect
the tasking.

        (2) In accordance with Reference (h), as the co-chair of the FRSCOM, oversee the
validation and prioritization of the NSG Geospatial Data Production Plan for the DoD.

        (3) Coordinate with the Combatant Commands to synchronize DoD intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance resources with other collection activities, and monitor execution
of GEOINT collection operations.

       (4) Identify and evaluate competing intelligence requirements across the Combatant
Commands. Communicate with NGA support teams, the NGA, the Combatant Commands,
Service staffs, DIA, National Security Agency (NSA)/Central Security Service (CSS), Defense
Security Service, NRO, and National Intelligence Coordination Center to coordinate intelligence
operations and resolve competition for resources.

         (5) Monitor planning and execution of GEOINT support to National Intelligence support
plans.




Change 2, 10/01/2020                             8                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011



5. DIRECTOR, NSA/CHIEF, CSS (DIRNSA/CHCSS). The DIRNSA/CHCSS, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S) and in addition to the responsibilities in section
7 of this enclosure, shall coordinate with the Director, NGA, to contribute signals intelligence to
NGA’s multi-intelligence activities, as needed.


6. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L) shall:

    a. Establish policies and guidance for the acquisition of GEOINT systems in consultation
with the DNI. Consult with the USD(I&S), the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Director, NGA, and others with regard to the
establishment of policies for the acquisition of GEOINT systems.

    b. Develop and maintain a DoD science and technology investment strategy to support the
development, acquisition, and integration of technological advances in tactical systems and
platforms providing or using GEOINT and managed by the Military Departments.


7. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

    a. Assign responsibilities and establish procedures, as appropriate, within their Component
to implement this Instruction.

  b. Coordinate with the USD(I&S) and the Director, NGA, as the GEOINT Functional
Manager, when proposing or overseeing new GEOINT-related activities or programs.

    c. Identify classified information and provide security classification guides approved by
authorized original classification authorities for all DoD airborne and DoD spaceborne GEOINT
data, sensors, and systems developed within their organizations.

    d. Manage and submit requirements, programming, and execution for GEOINT in
accordance with the priorities of the Combatant Commands, Military Services, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other NSG members in support of military operations in accordance
with Reference (h).


8. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities in section 7 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Plan and program for GEOINT resources in accordance with MIP fiscal policy and
guidance established by the USD(I&S) and with NGP program and budget guidance from the
Director, NGA.




Change 2, 10/01/2020                             9                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


  b. Provide to the Director, NGA, current and proposed plans, programs, and budgets of
GEOINT activities.

  c. Ensure, via consultation with the Director, NGA, that systems that use or produce
GEOINT are in compliance with GEOINT standards and interoperability established by NGA.

  d. Provide trained military personnel to NGA and the Combatant Commands to perform
GEOINT missions in accordance with approved requirements and procedures.

   e. Operate and maintain GEOINT facilities and resources, in consultation with the Director,
NGA, to conduct and support GEOINT operations as authorized and directed by the Secretary of
Defense or the USD(I&S), including military reserve programs to meet emergency or wartime
requirements for GEOINT.

    f. Support the Director, NGA, in unifying GEOINT operations by coordinating with and
collaborating on analysis and production.

   g. Coordinate with the Director, NGA, in conducting RDT&E to meet GEOINT needs:

     (1) Provide information on Military Department GEOINT RDT&E activities to the
GEOINT Functional Manager and Functional Manager for GEOINT.

       (2) Accomplish Military Department-specific GEOINT RDT&E tasks in accordance
with DoD guidance and direction.

   h. Coordinate, plan, program, budget, maintain, and conduct GEOINT training in accordance
with Reference (n).

    i. Provide the NSG with broad access to collected theater GEOINT data along with the
authority to store and distribute that data, in compliance with CJCS Instruction 3340.02
(Reference (q)).

    j. Coordinate with the Director, NGA, when foreign military sales cases involve articles and
services that require GEOINT data in compliance with DoDD 5105.65 (Reference (r)).

    k. Coordinate with and forward to the Director, NGA, any requirements for acquisition or
exchange of commercial or foreign government-owned imagery-related remote sensing data and
services.

   l. Develop GEOINT policies and doctrine consistent with NSG policies and doctrine.

    m. Identify classified information and provide security classification guides approved by
authorized original classification authorities for all DoD airborne and space-borne GEOINT data,
sensors, and systems developed within their organizations.

   n. Assign Departmental responsibilities and establish procedures, as appropriate, to



Change 2, 10/01/2020                           10                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


implement this Instruction.

   o. Coordinate the Military Department international GEOINT-related plans and programs
with the Director, NGA.


9. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, in addition to the responsibilities in section 7 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Monitor, report findings, and make recommendations to the Secretary of Defense
regarding the responsiveness of the NGA to military requirements.

    b. Respond to Combatant Commander requests for military GEOINT systems, units, or other
assets and coordinate the allocation of resources accordingly.

    c. Validate joint, Military Department, and Combatant Command GEOINT system, sensor,
platform, data, and product requirements.

   d. Develop and maintain joint doctrine for core, supporting, and related GEOINT
capabilities in joint operations.

    e. Formally incorporate the Director, NGA, in all requests for forces and global force
management processes or forums in which GEOINT personnel, systems, support or
infrastructure are requested or may be required.

   f. Coordinate GEOINT- or NGA-related activities with the Director, NGA.


10. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, in addition to the responsibilities in section 7 of this enclosure and
through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as appropriate, shall:

    a. As operators of theater-based GEOINT intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
assets, fully support taskings, as appropriate, to the greatest extent possible.

    b. Integrate, plan, and execute GEOINT operations to support intelligence planning,
approved military plans, and other operations, such as operational plans and National
Intelligence support plans, in coordination with the Director, NGA.

    c. Identify classified information and provide security classification guides approved by
authorized original classification authorities for all DoD airborne and DoD spaceborne GEOINT
data, sensors, and systems developed within their command.

    d. Support the Director, NGA, in unifying GEOINT operations by coordinating and
collaborating analysis and production activities and engaging in joint production initiatives.




Change 2, 10/01/2020                            11                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


    e. Submit to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff requirements for military GEOINT
platforms, units or other assets, simultaneously informing the Director, NGA.

    f. In compliance with References (m), determine the GEOINT foreign disclosure and release
parameters for DoD airborne and DoD spaceborne missions, and cooperate with the Director,
NGA, to publish consolidated instructions for active theater missions.

    g. Exercise operational control of military platforms, units, or other assets that have a
GEOINT capability in accordance with established procedures or supplemental instructions
issued by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, taking into consideration the GEOINT
advisory tasking by the Director, NGA.

    h. Forward all GEOINT data resulting from the tasking of GEOINT resources under the
Combatant Commander’s operational control to the Director, NGA, where possible, recognizing
current limitations within Service communications and available theater bandwidth.

    i. Provide the NSG with broad access to collected theater GEOINT data, along with the
authority to store and distribute that data, in compliance with Reference (q).

   j. Provide the NSG with access to asset collection planning and plan execution for GEOINT
and GEOINT-related assets in accordance with Reference (b).

  k. Apprise the Secretary of Defense, USD(I&S), and the Director, NGA, of the status of the
Combatant Command GEOINT resources.




Change 2, 10/01/2020                            12                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 3115.15, December 6, 2011


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


CJCS                 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DIA                  Defense Intelligence Agency
DIRNSA/CHCSS         Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
DNI                  Director of National Intelligence
DoDD                 DoD directive
DoDI                 DoD instruction

FDO                  foreign disclosure officer
FRSCOM               Foundation Data Requirements Subcommittee

GEOINT               geospatial intelligence

JIOC                 Joint Intelligence Operations Center

MIP                  Military Intelligence Program

NGA                  National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
NGP                  National Geospatial Intelligence Program
NIP                  National Intelligence Program
NRO                  National Reconnaissance Office
NSG                  National System for Geospatial Intelligence

RDT&E                research, development, test, and evaluation

USD(AT&L)            Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisitions, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I&S)             Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this Instruction are defined in Reference (b).

Functional Manager

GEOINT

NGP

NSG




Change 2, 10/01/2020                            13                            GLOSSARY
