                              Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 5505.13E
                                                                                  March 1, 2010
                                                            Incorporating Change 1, July 27, 2017

                                                                                         DoD CIO

SUBJECT:      DoD Executive Agent (EA) for the DoD Cyber Crime Center (DC3)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

    a. Directs the establishment of DC3 as an entity within the Department of the Air Force and
establishes the functions of DC3.

    b. Designates the Secretary of the Air Force (SECAF) as EA for DC3, including its
subordinate digital and multimedia forensics laboratory services and cyber investigative training
services, in accordance with DoD Directive (DoDD) 5101.1 (Reference (a)).

    c. Pursuant to section 125 and in accordance with section 376 of title 10, United States Code
(U.S.C.) (Reference (b)), establishes DC3 policy and assigns responsibilities for the centralized
coordination of cyber investigative training and digital and multimedia forensics, including
research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) and collaboration with other U.S.
Government and private industry organizations.

    d. Incorporates and cancels Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandums (References (c) and
(d)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”).

   b. The United States Coast Guard. The United States Coast Guard will adhere to DoD
cybersecurity requirements, standards, and policies in this issuance in accordance with the
                                                                 DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


direction in Paragraphs 4a, b, c, and d of the Memorandum of Agreement Between the
Department of Defense and the Department of Homeland Security (Reference (w)).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that the DC3 shall:

   a. Serve as one of the designated national cyber centers in accordance with National Security
Presidential Directive 54/Homeland Security Presidential Directive 23 (Reference (e)).

   b. Serve as the DoD Center of Excellence and establish DoD standards for digital and
multimedia forensics in coordination with the DoD Components.

    c. Develop and provide specialized cyber investigative training for DoD and non-DoD
personnel, as authorized.

    d. Serve as the operational focal point for Defense Industrial Base (DIB) cyber security (CS)
and information assurance (IA) information sharing and digital forensics analysis activities
performed to protect unclassified DoD information -- as defined in the Glossary -- that transits or
resides on unclassified DIB information systems and networks.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.




Change 1, 07/27/2017                             2
                                                          DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective March 1, 2010.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. DC3 Functions
   Glossary




Change 1, 07/27/2017                       3
                                                                            DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


                                               ENCLOSURE 1

                                                REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(b) Sections 125 and 376 of title 10, United States Code, as amended
(c) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Department of Defense Computer Forensics
    Laboratory (DCFL), and Department of Defense Computer Investigations Training
    Program (DCITP),” August 17, 2001 (hereby canceled)
(d) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Department of Defense Reform Initiative
    Directive #27 – DoD Computer Forensics Laboratory and Training Program,” February 10,
    1998 (hereby canceled)
(e) National Security Presidential Directive 54/Homeland Security Presidential Directive 23,
    “Cybersecurity Policy,” January 8, 2008 1
(f) DoD Directive 5144.02, “DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO),” November 21, 2014
(g) DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulations (FMRs),”
    Volumes 1-15, as amended
(h) DoD Directive 7045.14 “The Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE)
    Process,” January 25, 2013
(i) DoD Directive 3020.40, “Mission Assurance (MA),” November 29, 2016
(j) DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
    Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(k) DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)),”
    November 23, 2005, as amended
(l) DoD Directive 5240.02, “Counterintelligence (CI),” March 17, 2015
(m) DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(n) DoD Directive 5100.20, “National Security Agency/Central Security Service (NSA/CSS),”
    January 26, 2010
(o) DoD Instruction 5220.22, “National Industrial Security Program (NISP),” March 18, 2011
(p) DoD Instruction 5240.19, “Counterintelligence Support to the Defense Critical
    Infrastructure Program (DCIP),” January 31, 2014
(q) DoD Instruction 3025.21, “Defense Support of Civilian Law Enforcement Agencies,”
    February 27, 2013
(r) Sections 1535 and 1536 of title 31, United States Code
(s) Intelligence Community Directive 302, “Document and Media Exploitation,” July 6, 2007 2
(t) DoD Instruction 5200.01, “DoD Information Security Program and Protection of Sensitive
    Compartmented Information (SCI),” April 21, 2016
(u) DoD Manual 5200.01, “DoD Information Security Program: Overview, Classification, and
    Declassification,” February 24, 2012
(v) DoD Directive 5230.09, “Clearance of DoD Information for Public Release,” August 22,
    2008, as amended


1
 Copies of this classified document are available to authorized personnel upon request to DHS.
2
 Copies of this document are available to authorized personnel on the SIPRNET at
www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Image:ICD_302.pdf.


Change 1, 07/27/2017                                    4                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                        DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


(w) Memorandum of Agreement between the Department of Defense and The Department of
    Homeland Security Regarding Department of Defense and U.S. Coast Guard Cooperation
    on Cybersecurity and Cyberspace Operations, January 19, 2017 3




3
  Available at https://dcms.uscg.afpims.mil/Our-Organization/Assistant-Commandant-for-C4IT-CG-6-/The-Office-
of-Information-Management-CG-61/Interagency-Agreements/


Change 1, 07/27/2017                                 5                            ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. DoD CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (DoD CIO). The DoD CIO shall:

    a. Provide overall policy guidance and validated funding and manpower requirements, in
coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)), the Under Secretary
of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)), the Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy (USD(P)), the IG DoD, and the SECAF.

    b. Provide guidance and oversight for the EA for DC3 and perform responsibilities as
prescribed in paragraph 5.3. of Reference (a).

    c. Establish policy and guidance for DC3 activities in accordance with the priorities
established by the Secretary of Defense in DoDD 5144.02 (Reference (f)), and in consonance
with the USD(I), USD(AT&L), USD(P), IG DoD, and SECAF to ensure the efficient and
effective use of DC3 capabilities.

    d. Oversee DC3 planning, programming, budgeting, and execution (PPBE) activities by
reviewing proposed resource programs and requirements, reviewing budget estimates, approving
proposed resource allocations, and monitoring the implementation and performance of approved
programs in accordance with the guidance in DoD 7000.14-R (Reference (g)) and the
responsibilities in DoDD 7045.14 (Reference (h)). Coordinate with the Heads of the DoD
Components, as appropriate, in the development of the DC3 budget requirements.

   e. Issue detailed procedural guidance for the DC3 process and timelines associated with the
annual DC3 program and budget development, reprogramming, and other PPBE requirements.

   f. Approve the addition or deletion of programs, functions, and activities to and from DC3.

    g. Coordinate with the USD(AT&L) on programs, policies, and activities pertaining to DC3
involving acquisition, cyber incident damage assessment, and digital and multimedia forensics
relating to the Defense Forensics Enterprise.

    h. Coordinate with the USD(I) on intelligence support and unclassified DoD information as
related to DC3 activities.

    i. Coordinate with the USD(P) on integrating DC3 activities into the Defense Critical
Infrastructure Program (DoDD 3020.40, Reference (i)) and in support of Reference (e)
implementation requirements.

   j. Coordinate with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) (USD(C))/Chief Financial
Officer (CFO), Department of Defense, on DC3 budget formulation and execution.




Change 1, 07/27/2017                           6                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


   k. Coordinate with the IG DoD to ensure appropriate provisioning of DC3 capability to
support the criminal investigative requirements of the DoD Components.

   l. Coordinate with the SECAF in his or her capacity as the EA for DC3.


2. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L) shall:

    a. Identify, develop, and implement policy and processes in accordance with DoDD 5134.01
(Reference (j) into DoD acquisition processes for improved protection of unclassified DoD
information on DIB information systems and networks, as well as cyber incident damage
assessments in support of DIB CS and IA activities.

   b. In coordination with the DoD CIO and the Heads of the DoD Components, develop
funding and manpower requirements to support cyber incident damage assessments of
unauthorized access and potential compromise of unclassified DIB networks containing
unclassified DoD information, including forensic and analytic support for DC3.

   c. Coordinate with the DoD CIO on digital and multimedia forensics relating to the Defense
Forensics Enterprise.


3. USD(I). The USD(I) shall oversee the development of intelligence policy, programs, and
guidance for DC3 in accordance with DoDD 5143.01 (Reference (k)), DoDD 5240.02
(Reference (l)), and DoDD 5240.01 (Reference (m)).


4. DIRECTOR, NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (NSA)/CHIEF, CENTRAL SECURITY
SERVICE (CSS). The Director, NSA/Chief, CSS, under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(I), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall support DIB
CS and IA activities, including DC3 analysis and research, DC3 specialized cyber investigative
training, and DC3 digital and multimedia forensic RDT&E, pursuant to DoDD 5100.20
(Reference (n)).


5. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). The Director, DIA, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of
this enclosure, shall provide analytical support to DC3 activities in support of DIB CS and IA
activities and the cyber incident damage assessment process.


6. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE SECURITY SERVICE (DSS). The Director, DSS, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I), in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of
this enclosure, shall ensure classified information released to industry by the DC3 through DIB
CS and IA activities is properly safeguarded pursuant to DoDI 5220.22 (Reference (o)).




Change 1, 07/27/2017                              7                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


7. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall:

   a. Assist the SECAF and the Director, DC3, in developing a DC3 strategic human capital
management plan, with supporting recruitment, retention, and development strategies, to ensure
DC3 has the talent needed to meet mission requirements.

   b. Approve the classification of new positions into the Federal law enforcement job series.


8. USD(C)/CFO. The USD(C)/CFO shall oversee the budget formulation and execution of DC3
activities in the DoD budget in coordination with the DoD CIO.


9. IG DOD. The IG DoD, in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall,
in coordination with the DoD CIO, support DoD Component cyber crime-related criminal
investigative requirements.


10. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND DEFENSE AND GLOBAL
SECURITY (ASD(HS&GS)). The ASD(HD&GS), under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(P), shall oversee the DoD response to Reference (e) and, in coordination with the DoD
CIO, integrate the DC3 role in specialized cyber training, in DIB CS and IA activities, and as a
national cyber center into the response.


11. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

    a. Provide DC3 funding in accordance with Reference (g) for missions or specialized
projects requiring continuing levels of digital and multimedia forensics, investigative training, or
other specialized DC3 support or capabilities. The Heads of the DoD Components are
encouraged to establish a memorandum of agreement with the Director, DC3, when such
requirements arise.

    b. Coordinate with the Director, DC3, as the DoD Center of Excellence for digital and
multimedia forensics, specialized investigative cyber training and DIB CS and IA activities,
including analysis, reporting, and support to cyber incident damage assessments.

    c. Ensure DoD criminal investigative and counterintelligence (CI) organizations provide
DC3, to the maximum extent possible, copies of digital media and logs and investigative and
technical data associated with cyber intrusion incidents, investigations, and operations.


12. SECAF. The SECAF, in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, as
the DoD EA for DC3, shall:




Change 1, 07/27/2017                             8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


   a. Establish and maintain DC3 as an entity within the Department of the Air Force with the
functions described in Enclosure 3.

  b. Provide DC3 funding and manpower in coordination with the DoD CIO and the Director,
DC3.

   c. Assign personnel to DC3 in accordance with approved authorizations and established
procedures for detail or assignment to joint duty.

   d. Appoint the Director, DC3.

   e. Assist the Director, DC3, in developing and executing strategic human capital
management plans to ensure DC3 is properly staffed with employees with the requisite skills and
competencies needed to perform DC3 mission requirements.


13. COMMANDER, UNITED STATES STRATEGIC COMMAND (CDRUSSTRATCOM).
The CDRUSSTRATCOM, in addition to the responsibilities in section 11 of this enclosure, shall
coordinate with the DoD CIO to support DC3 activities, including analysis and reporting, and
shall rely on DC3 for digital and multimedia forensics support and specialized investigative
training, as necessary.




Change 1, 07/27/2017                           9                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


                                          ENCLOSURE 3

                                        DC3 FUNCTIONS


1. DIRECTOR, DC3. The Director, DC3, shall:

   a. Maintain credentials as a special agent.

   b. Plan, program, budget, and execute funding and manpower to accomplish programs and
requirements by providing budget estimates, allocating resources, and implementing approved
programs consistent with DoD CIO and SECAF guidance each fiscal year.

    c. Oversee DoD digital and multimedia forensics and cyber investigative processes,
procedures, and standards, and support multiple mission areas ranging from criminal
investigations, fraud investigations, CI, counterterrorism activities, safety inquiries, and
countering threats to critical infrastructure.

    d. Communicate directly with the DoD Components on matters related to this Directive. To
the extent practicable and consistent with the responsibilities and functions of the Military
Departments, the Head of the DoD Component concerned shall be kept informed of such direct
communications.

  e. Request assistance as needed from other audit, evaluation, and investigative units of the
DoD Components. In such cases, assistance shall be requested through the Head of the DoD
Component concerned.

    f. Pursuant to approved delegations and in accordance with governing regulations, execute
hiring authorities and set salary as well as recruitment and retention incentives. Positions
assigned to the DC3 may meet requirements for classification as General Series 1811 (Federal
Law Enforcement), including coverage under the Federal Law Enforcement Retirement System,
subject to approval of the USD(P&R).


2. DC3 FUNCTIONS. The DC3 shall:

   a. Function as one of the designated national cyber centers pursuant to Reference (e).

   b. Function as the DoD Center of Excellence for digital and multimedia forensics by
providing:

      (1) Digital and multimedia processing and incident analysis for the Department of
Defense.

        (2) Technical assistance, guidelines, and standards for DoD digital and multimedia
forensic organizations, including:



Change 1, 07/27/2017                             10                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010



            (a) Providing technical assistance to DoD Component digital and multimedia
forensic laboratories.

            (b) Conducting digital and multimedia forensics analysis for forensic support to CI
investigations in accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5240.19 (Reference (p)).

            (c) Maintaining an electronic library of information for test and validation reports for
digital forensics tools.

         (d) Advancing digital and multimedia forensic RDT&E and collaborating with
Government and private industry to keep abreast of cutting-edge technology.

            (e) Developing criteria for the referral of media to DC3 by the DoD Components that
is the subject of digital and multimedia forensics analysis.

            (f) Providing guidance on accreditation of DoD digital forensic labs and training and
certification of examiners.

            (g) Developing standards for forensic test and validation of cyber investigative and
digital forensics hardware and software.

   c. Provide specialized investigative training to:

        (1) DoD digital forensics examiners, cyber investigators, selected information
technology professionals, and other DoD personnel to ensure DoD and DIB information systems
are secure from unauthorized use, criminal and fraudulent activities, and foreign intelligence
service exploitation; and/or

        (2) Personnel responsible for the exploitation of digital media for intelligence and CI
objectives.

    d. Support digital and multimedia forensic requests from and provide training services to
non-DoD Government organizations in accordance with Reference (b), DoDI 3025.21
(Reference (q)), and sections 1535 and 1536 of title 31, U.S.C. (Reference (r)) under a business
enterprise and fee-for-service program.

    e. Maintain and serve as the operational focal point for threat information sharing through
the DoD-DIB Collaborative Information Sharing Environment to protect unclassified DoD
information residing on or transiting DIB unclassified networks.

    f. Operate as a law enforcement support and CI support activity within the Department of
Defense pursuant to the authorities vested in the Secretary of Defense by Reference (b). Unless
otherwise directed by the Secretary of Defense, the law enforcement responsibilities assigned by
this Directive do not replace or supersede those responsibilities currently assigned to the Defense
Criminal Investigative Service, the Army Criminal Investigation Command, the Naval Criminal



Change 1, 07/27/2017                            11                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


Investigative Service, or the Air Force Office of Special Investigations as defense criminal
investigative organizations, nor do they supersede the CI authorities of other DoD Components.

    g. Seek and maintain, as appropriate, accreditation or certification of DC3 entities, as well as
personnel in coordination with the USD(P&R), to the extent such is supportive of and consistent
with mission requirements; leverage, as appropriate, inter-agency efforts in this regard.

   h. Support DoD critical infrastructure protection by enhancing the cyber security of the DIB
against cyber threats and crimes pursuant to Reference (i).

   i. Maintain a central clearinghouse and repository for cyber CI tools, techniques, or other
procedures and share them with other DoD CI components.

   j. Act as a National Media Exploitation Center forensics partner, providing digital forensics
processing and analysis for seized digital media to enable multi-disciplinary exploitation
objectives, pursuant to Intelligence Community Directive 302 (Reference (s)).




Change 1, 07/27/2017                            12                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(HD&GS)              Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
                        Security
DoD CIO                 DoD Chief Information Officer

CDRUSSTRATCOM           Commander, United States Strategic Command
CI                      counterintelligence
CS                      cyber security
CSS                     Central Security Service

DC3                     DoD Cyber Crime Center
DIA                     Defense Intelligence Agency
DIB                     Defense Industrial Base
DoDD                    DoD Directive
DoDI                    DoD Instruction
DSS                     Defense Security Services

EA                      Executive Agent

IA                      information assurance
IG DoD                  Inspector General of the Department of Defense

NSA                     National Security Agency

PPBE                    planning, programming, budgeting, and execution

RDT&E                   research, development, test, and evaluation

SECAF                   Secretary of the Air Force

U.S.C.                  United States Code
USD(AT&L)               Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(C)/CFO              Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                        Department of Defense
USD(I)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)                Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness




 Change 1, 07/27/2017                           13                         GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDD 5505.13E, March 1, 2010


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

CS. Measures taken to protect a computer, networks, or information or computer system (as on
the Internet) and electronic information storage facilities belonging to, or operated by or for, the
Department of Defense or U.S. Government, against unauthorized access, attack, or attempts to
access.

cyber incident damage assessment. A managed, coordinated, and standardized process
conducted to determine the impact on future defense programs, defense scientific and research
projects, or defense warfighting capabilities resulting from an incident into a DIB unclassified
computer system or network.

DIB. The Department of Defense, the U.S. Government, and private sector worldwide industrial
complex with capabilities to perform research and development and to design, produce, and
maintain military weapon systems, subsystems, components, or parts to meet military
requirements.

digital evidence. Information of probative value stored or transmitted in binary form.

digital forensics. In its strictest connotation, the application of computer science and
investigative procedures involving the examination of digital evidence - following proper search
authority, chain of custody, validation with mathematics, use of validated tools, repeatability,
reporting, and possibly expert testimony. Beyond traditional legal purposes, the same
techniques, scientific rigor, and procedural precision now support the range of military
operations and courses of action (e.g., computer network operations as well as CI objectives).

unclassified DoD information. Unclassified information that requires controls pursuant to DoDI
5200.1, DoD Manual 5200.01, and DoDD 5230.09 (References (t), (u), and (v)).




Change 1, 07/27/2017                             14                             GLOSSARY
