                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 5101.10E
                                                                               October 26, 2015
                                                         Incorporating Change 3, October 8, 2019

                                                                                       USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:      DoD Executive Agent (EA) for Subsistence

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5101.10 (Reference (a)) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities pursuant to section 113 of Title 10, United States Code (Reference (b)) for the
management of subsistence across the spectrum of military operations.

   b. Designates the Director, Defense Logistics Agency (DLA), as the DoD EA for
Subsistence in accordance with DoDD 5101.1 (Reference (c)).

    c. Identifies the roles and responsibilities of the DoD EA for Subsistence and his or her
relationship to the DoD Components with respect to all aspects of subsistence support for the
Military Services.


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD
(referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

    a. Provide healthy, wholesome, nutritious food items to authorized military and civilian
personnel.

   b. Coordinate resourcing and operation of the DoD subsistence acquisition and logistics
program through the DoD EA for Subsistence.

   c. Provide efficient and effective worldwide support for the DoD during peacetime and
under military operations.
                                                             DoDD 5101.10E, October 26, 2015




4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This change is administrative and updates references and
organizational symbols to reflect the reorganization of the Office of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, pursuant to the July 13, 2018 Deputy
Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (d)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective October 26, 2015.




                                                Robert O. Work
                                                Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 3, 10/08/2019                            2
                                                           DoDD 5101.10E, October 26, 2015


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5101.10, “DoD Executive Agent (EA) for Subsistence,”
      September 27, 2004 (hereby cancelled)
(b)   Section 113 of Title 10, United States Code
(c)   DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(d)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
      Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
      of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(e)   DoD Instruction 1338.10, “Department of Defense Food Service Program (DFSP),”
      September 12, 2012, as amended
(f)   DoD Manual 1338.10, “DoD Food Service Program (DFSP),” December 2, 2014, as
      amended
(g)   DoD Directive 4500.09E, “Transportation and Traffic Management,” September 11, 2007,
      as amended
(h)   DoD Directive 3235.02E, “DoD Combat Feeding Research and Engineering Program, DoD
      Combat Feeding Research and Engineering Board, and DoD Nutrition Committee,”
      May 21, 2004, as amended




Change 3, 10/08/2019                          3                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 5101.10E, October 26, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION AND SUSTAINMENT
(USD(A&S)). The USD(A&S) establishes policy for the DoD subsistence acquisition and
logistics program through the implementation of this directive and DoD Instruction 1338.10
(Reference (e)).


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SUSTAINMENT (ASD(S)). Under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(A&S) and consistent with Reference (e), the
ASD(S):

   a. Provides overall guidance and direction for the DoD subsistence acquisition and logistics
program though the implementation of Reference (e) and DoD Manual 1338.10 (Reference (f)).

   b. Oversees the subsistence support activities of the DoD EA for Subsistence and the Joint
Subsistence Policy Board (JSPB), as established in Reference (f), to ensure:

       (1) Subsistence requirements are synchronized with the development of operational
plans and force structure changes.

       (2) Logistics plans are developed for subsistence support operations in all environments.


3. DIRECTOR, DLA. Under the authority, direction, and control of USD(A&S), through the
ASD(S), and in addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, the Director, DLA,
in his or her capacity as the DoD EA for Subsistence:

   a. In coordination with the DoD Components, administers the JSPB and develops and
implements plans and procedures for subsistence support.

   b. Plans for, procures, manages, and distributes subsistence products throughout the DoD
supply chain.

   c. Delivers subsistence items to locations as mutually agreed to by the DoD Components.

   d. Maintains authorized war reserve stocks of subsistence.

   e. In coordination with the Military Departments, plans, develops, funds, implements, and
maintains a Joint Food Management System that interfaces with existing Service Systems.




Change 3, 10/08/2019                             4                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 5101.10E, October 26, 2015


   f. Provides subsistence common-user transportation requirements to the United States
Transportation Command for movement in the Defense Transportation System, as prescribed in
DoDD 4500.09E (Reference (g)).


4. DOD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

   a. Provide to the DoD EA for Subsistence timely and accurate forecasts of requirements for
subsistence and feedback regarding the types and quantities of subsistence items to be procured
and delivered across the full spectrum of military operations.

    b. Coordinate with the DoD EA for Subsistence through the JSPB regarding requirements
determination, logistics planning, and proposed mission transfers to assure materiel availability
during peacetime and wartime and eliminate duplication of effort.

   c. Develop and distribute subsistence employment and support procedures that are
compatible with this directive.

   d. Develop, program, and budget for subsistence support, including research and
development, in support of the Combatant Commanders’ operational plans.

   e. Reimburse the DoD EA for Subsistence for subsistence goods and services provided and
mission transfers, where applicable.

    f. Coordinate with the Defense Commissary Agency and Service Exchanges, retail military
stores, on matters of mutual support in overseas locations.

   g. Coordinate with the DoD Nutrition Committee, chaired by the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Health Affairs, to ensure the wholesomeness of subsistence products in accordance
with DoDD 3235.02E (Reference (h)).


5. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In addition to the responsibilities
in section 4 of this enclosure, the Secretaries of the Military Departments:

    a. In coordination with the Director, DLA, plan, develop, fund, implement, and maintain a
Joint Food Management System that interfaces with existing Service Systems.

  b. Support the physical hand-off and transfer of accountability and responsibility from the
DoD EA for Subsistence.

   c. Provide a representative to the JSPB to:

        (1) Synchronize subsistence requirements with the development of operational plans and
force structure changes.




Change 3, 10/08/2019                             5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 5101.10E, October 26, 2015


       (2) Develop logistics plans for subsistence support operations in all environments.


6. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. In addition to the responsibilities in
section 4 of this enclosure, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

   a. Provides guidance on subsistence support for operational plans.

   b. Ensures that the Combatant Commanders assess the adequacy of subsistence support for
deployed forces.

   c. In conjunction with the other DoD Components, develops joint doctrine for the
employment of subsistence resources.

   d. Monitors the Program Objective Memorandum and budget submissions of the Military
Departments to ensure that programmed resources support validated requirements.


7. COMBATANT COMMANDERS. Through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and in
addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, the Combatant Commanders:

   a. Coordinate with the DoD EA for Subsistence to include subsistence support in:

       (1) Planning and executing military operations.

       (2) Monitoring subsistence distribution and asset visibility.

   b. Determine, for the area of operations, the point of physical hand-off and transfer of
accountability and responsibility from the DoD EA for Subsistence to the Secretaries of the
Military Departments.

   c. Provide timely and accurate forecasts of subsistence requirements and feedback to the
DoD EA for Subsistence regarding the types and quantities of subsistence items to be procured
and delivered across the full spectrum of military operations.

    d. Ensure that provisions are made for the physical protection of non-combatants, the
services they provide, and their associated facilities contributing subsistence support to military
operations.




Change 3, 10/08/2019                             6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5101.10E, October 26, 2015


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(S)        Assistant Secretary of Defense for Sustainment

DLA           Defense Logistics Agency
DoDD          DoD directive

EA            executive agent

JSPB          Joint Subsistence Policy Board

USD(A&S) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

Defense Commissary Agency. Defense Agency that oversees the operation of military
commissaries worldwide. Military commissaries provide groceries for cost plus 5% surcharge to
active military, National Guard, and Reserve members, retirees, and qualified dependents.

DoD Nutrition Committee. A committee comprised of representatives from the military service
health community who specialize in nutrition, health promotion, combat feeding, and military
food service programs. The committee develops and coordinates nutrition policy and research
priorities.

Service Exchanges. Retail stores that provide active military, National Guard, and Reserve
members, retirees, and qualified dependents with commercial and military merchandise and
services.

subsistence. Food and food-related supplies, including condiments, utensils, paper products, and
bottled water.




Change 3, 10/08/2019                              7                                GLOSSARY
