                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 3115.17
                                                                              November 16, 2016
                                            Incorporating Change 1, Effective September 21, 2020

                                                                                          USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:      Management and Oversight of DoD All-Source Analysis

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5143.01 (Reference (a)), this
instruction:

    a. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for the management and oversight of DoD
all-source analysis. (Use of the term “analytic” in this issuance refers to all-source analytic
functions and activities.)

   b. Provides for establishing an intragovernmental committee as the primary forum for
Enterprise-wide analytic synchronization and integration.

   c. Incorporates and cancels the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Memorandums
(References (b) through (d)).


2. APPLICABILITY.

    a. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands (CCMDs) , the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in
this instruction as the “DoD Components”).

    b. Nothing in this instruction will be interpreted to subsume or replace the responsibilities,
functions, or authorities of the DoD Component heads or OSD officials as prescribed by law,
assigned in Chartering DoD Directives, or provided in DoD policy issuances, including
Combatant Commander (CCDR) authority to organize, employ, manage, assign tasks, designate
objectives, establish plans, policies, priorities, and requirements, and give authoritative direction
to assigned forces in accordance with Title 10, United States Code (Reference (e)), the Unified
Command Plan (Reference (f)), and Joint Publication 1 (Reference (g)).
                                                                DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016



3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to conduct all-source analysis:

    a. As an integrated Defense Intelligence All-Source Analysis Enterprise (DIAAE) under the
strategic guidance of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)),
managed at the Enterprise level by the DoD Functional Manager for All-Source Analysis (DoD
FM/A), and executed by the DoD Components.

   b. In a manner that maximizes the effective and efficient use of resources and minimizes
unintended duplication through the alignment of analytic responsibilities across the DoD
Components. This alignment will result from a collaborative, transparent decision process that is
based on the mission, analytic capability, and analytic capacity of the Defense Intelligence
Components involved. The DIAAE maximizes reuse of and leverages all analytic output in
support of all DoD and national customers.

    c. Under a rigorous risk management system that monitors analytic risk and makes analytic
alignment adjustments and recommends resource changes to ensure that, at the Enterprise level,
analytic capacity is appropriately aligned against the DoD’s intelligence priorities and supports
Secretary of Defense, CJCS, Secretaries of the Military Departments, CCDRs, defense planner,
joint task forces, and national policymaker requirements.

   d. In a manner that provides the flexibility to surge analytic assets as necessary to fully
support short-term DoD mission requirements across the full range of military operations.

    e. Through the use of the Defense Intelligence All-Source Analysis Enterprise Board of
Governors (DIAAE BOG) as the primary forum for Enterprise-wide analytic synchronization
and integration. The DIAAE BOG will be established as an intragovernmental committee
pursuant to DoD Instruction 5105.18 (Reference (h)) and will serve as the senior coordinating
body for DoD analytic issues, by providing a forum for issue resolution, transparency, risk
management, and analytic alignment based on shifting priorities, emerging requirements, and
budget constraints. DIAAE BOG analytic alignment recommendations involving resources
assigned to a DoD Component will be made only with the concurrence of the DoD Component’s
DIAAE BOG representative. Any recommendation involving changes to the numbers of
CCMD-assigned personnel will be processed in accordance with the Joint Intelligence
Operations Center Execute Order Modification 3 (Reference (i)), which requires approval of
such changes by the Secretary of Defense.

    f. Consistent with the Principles of Joint Intelligence in Joint Publication 2-0 (Reference (j))
and the Intelligence Community (IC) Analytic Standards, including Analytic Tradecraft
Standards, in Intelligence Community Directive 203 (Reference (k)) and as appropriate to the
level and type of analysis being performed.

   g. In a manner that encourages and incentivizes analytic collaboration within the DIAAE
and with the broader IC.

   h. In accordance with DoD Directive 5240.01 (Reference (l)).



Change 1, 09/21/2020                             2
                                                             DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016




4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This administrative change updates:

   a. The title of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the USD(I&S) in
accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (m)).

  b. Administrative changes in accordance with current standards of the Office of the Chief
Management Officer of the Department of Defense.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective November 16, 2016.




                                                Marcel Lettre
                                                Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. DoD FM/A Functions
Glossary




Change 1, 09/21/2020                           3
                                                             DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016


                                        ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
      (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(b)   Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Memorandum, “Realignment of Analytic
      Responsibilities Within Defense Intelligence,” August 20, 2004 (hereby cancelled)
(c)   Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Memorandum, “Realignment of Analytic
      Responsibilities Within Defense Intelligence,” May 21, 2005 (hereby cancelled)
(d)   Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Memorandum, “Management and Oversight of
      the Defense Intelligence Analytic Community,” October 31, 2007 (hereby cancelled)
(e)   Title 10, United States Code
(f)   Unified Command Plan, April 6, 2011 with Change-1, September 12, 2011
(g)   Joint Publication 1, “Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States,” current edition
(h)   DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
      Management Program,” July 10, 2009, as amended
(i)   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Message, DTG 040001ZOCT11, “Joint Intelligence
      Operations Center (JIOC) Execute Order (EXORD) Modification 3 (U)”
(j)   Joint Publication 2.0, “Joint Intelligence,” October 22, 2013
(k)   Intelligence Community Directive 203, “Analytic Standards,” January 2, 2015
(l)   DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(m)   Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
      December 20, 2019
(n)   DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(o)   DoD Directive 3000.06, “Combat Support Agencies (CSAs),” June 27, 2013, as amended
(p)   DoD Instruction 3305.02, “DoD General Intelligence Training and Certification,”
      August 12, 2015, as amended
(q)   DoD Directive 5205.12, “Military Intelligence Program (MIP),” November 14, 2008, as
      amended
(r)   Intelligence Community Directive 104, “National Intelligence Program (NIP) Budget
      Formulation and Justification, Execution, and Performance Evaluation,” April 30, 2013
(s)   DoD Directive 7730.65, “Department of Defense Readiness Reporting System (DRRS),”
      May 11, 2015, as amended
(t)   Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
      Associated Terms,” current edition




Change 1, 09/21/2020                            4                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(I&S). The USD(I&S):

   a. Establishes DoD all-source analysis policy.

    b. Oversees the implementation of DoD all-source analysis policy, plans, programs, and
performance to include the issuances and policies of the DoD FM/A and the DoD Components
involved in DIAAE activities.

   c. Develops and maintains the consolidated set of Defense Intelligence priorities that guides
DIAAE analysis and reflects the intelligence needs of all Defense Intelligence consumers.

   d. Establishes the DIAAE BOG as an intragovernmental committee and ensures that the
DIAAE BOG is administered in accordance with Reference (h).

   e. Evaluates the advice and recommendations, provided by the DIAAE BOG, and when such
advice falls with the scope of the responsibilities and functions formally assigned to the
USD(I&S) in Reference (a), determines which actions will be implemented by the Department of
Defense.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). Under the authority, direction,
and control of the USD(I&S), in accordance with DoD Directive 5105.21 (Reference (n)), the
Director, DIA:

    a. Provides all-source analysis to meet OSD, Joint Staff, Military Department, defense
planner, and national policymaker requirements.

   b. In coordination with the CCDRs and the Joint Staff, provides all-source analysis to meet
CCMD and joint task force requirements as a Combat Support Agency pursuant to DoD
Directive 3000.06 (Reference (o)).

   c. Monitors the state of Defense Intelligence analytic capabilities to advise the USD(I&S) in
program and budget reviews.

    d. Ensures the functions of the DoD FM/A are carried out as described in Enclosure 3. The
Director, DIA serves as the DoD FM/A or designates another senior DoD official as DoD FM/A.
If such a designation is made the Director, DIA, will provide written notification to the
USD(I&S) and provide the DoD FM/A with the necessary resources to carry out the DoD FM/A
functions.




Change 1, 09/21/2020                            5                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016


    e. In collaboration with the DIAAE and in accordance with the responsibilities in DoD
Instruction 3305.02 (Reference (p)), establishes training, education, and certification programs
for Defense Intelligence all-source analysts in accordance with Joint and IC standards in
References (j) and (k).

    f. Executes the responsibilities of the DIA Military Intelligence Program Component
Manager and the General Defense Intelligence Program Manager for the management of Defense
Intelligence all-source analytic resources for DIA, the CCMD Joint Intelligence Operations
Centers, Joint Staff Intelligence Directorate Staff, and the Military Service Intelligence Centers
in accordance with DoD Directive 5205.12 (Reference (q)) and Intelligence Community
Directive 104 (Reference (r)).


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)) AND UNDER
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND LOGISTICS
(USD(AT&L)). The USD(P) and USD(AT&L):

    a. For the fulfillment of missions, functions, and responsibilities assigned to their respective
OSD Component, provide all standing priority intelligence requirements (PIRs) and other
intelligence requirements to the DoD FM/A and the USD(I&S).

    b. Establish procedures to evaluate the degree to which the DIAAE is satisfying submitted
intelligence requirements and provide the results of these evaluations to the DoD FM/A and the
USD(I&S).


4. DOD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

   a. Provide assistance, support, data, and information within their available resources to
enable the DoD FM/A to implement the responsibilities assigned in this instruction.

    b. Provide all DoD Component standing PIRs and other intelligence requirements to the
DoD FM/A and the USD(I&S) via established command channels for enterprise-level
integration, deconfliction, and maintenance.

  c. Establish procedures to evaluate the degree to which the DIAAE is meeting its DoD
Component intelligence requirements and provide the results of these evaluations to the DoD
FM/A, the USD(I&S), and as appropriate, the CJCS.

   d. Manage and execute the analytic activities of assigned forces and assets based on DoD
Component missions, priorities, capabilities, capacities, and coordinated DIAAE responsibilities.
Provide timely notification to the DoD FM/A if assigned DIAAE responsibilities cannot be met
due to resource constraints or organizational operational requirements so that other DoD
Components may be consulted for potential satisfaction of these unmet Defense Intelligence
requirements.




Change 1, 09/21/2020                              6                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016



5. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In addition to the responsibilities
in section 4 of this enclosure, the Secretaries of the Military Departments:

   a. Maintain responsibility for establishing intelligence capabilities necessary to fulfill
Service-specific intelligence needs.

   b. Designate a senior official to serve as representative to the DIAAE BOG.


6. CJCS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, the CJCS:

    a. Identifies intelligence gaps and shortfalls, and advises the DoD FM/A on Defense
Intelligence requirements, resources, intelligence gaps, and shortfalls.

   b. Ensures all CCMD intelligence requirements are provided to the DoD FM/A.

    c. Provides feedback on the effectiveness of the all-source analysis support to joint forces to
the DoD FM/A and the USD(I&S).

   d. Provides input, as requested, to DIAAE reviews.


7. CCDRS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, the CCDRs:

   a. Advise the CJCS and the DoD FM/A of the CCMD’s intelligence priorities for all-source
analysis via established command channels.

   b. Designate a senior official to serve as representative to the DIAAE BOG.

    c. Provide the CCMD’s intelligence requirements for all assigned military operations and
planning activities to the CJCS.




Change 1, 09/21/2020                             7                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016


                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                                   DOD FM/A FUNCTIONS

The DoD FM/A:

    a. In collaboration with the USD(I&S) and the DIAAE, promotes an analytic environment of
data sharing and trust.

    b. In coordination with the DIAAE BOG, develops and implements a risk management
system to monitor and adjust all-source analytic alignments to ensure that DIAAE performance
is optimized against the integrated Defense Intelligence priorities. Analytic alignment
adjustments of DoD Component-assigned responsibilities or assets must be done with the
concurrence of that Component. For cases in which Component concurrence cannot be
achieved, the Director, DIA, will forward the proposed adjustment to the USD(I&S) for
resolution. Any proposals involving changes to the numbers of CCMD-assigned personnel will
be processed in accordance with Reference (i).

    c. In collaboration with the DIAAE, establishes and issues guidance, plans, procedures and
performance management systems to implement this instruction.

   d. Monitors Defense Intelligence all-source analysis practices and products to adhere to Joint
and IC analytic standards, as appropriate, and this instruction.

   e. Advises the USD(I&S); the CJCS; and the Director, DIA, on the development and
implementation of training, education, and certification programs for Defense Intelligence all-
source analysts in accordance with Joint and IC standards pursuant to References (j) and (k).

    f. In coordination with relevant DoD Components, aligns DoD all-source analytic
responsibilities and recommends levels of effort across the DoD Components based on
Component mission, analytic capability, and analytic capacity.

   g. For cases in which analytic surge is required to support DoD operational missions,
coordinates and synchronizes a realignment of DIAAE analytic capacity to meet the mission
requirements, while managing and mitigating surge-related increased risk in other analytic areas.
Such analytic surges include crisis management support to the Joint Staff J-2 pursuant to
Reference (n).

   h. Establishes a standardized all-source analysis performance data reporting and analysis
process that evaluates the alignment of all-source analytic work effort, outputs, and performance
against Defense Intelligence priorities and DoD Component PIRs. Aligns this effort
appropriately with reviews of DoD Components’ all-source analysis-related Mission Essential
Task Lists and Agency Mission Essential Task Lists pursuant to DoD Directive 7730.65
(Reference (s)).

   i. Chairs the DIAAE BOG and assigns additional representatives as needed.



Change 1, 09/21/2020                            8                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                             DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016



    j. Regularly apprises the USD(I&S) of the activities and performance of the DIAAE and
recommends changes to resource allocations to the USD(I&S), the CJCS, and the Director, DIA.

   k. Engages with the Office of the Director of National Intelligence and the IC to establish
procedures and mechanisms to satisfy Defense Intelligence requirements that are more
appropriately met by non-DoD IC elements based on their analytic expertise and organizational
mission.

    l. Recommends to the USD(I&S), CJCS, and Director, DIA, engagement and collaboration
strategies and initiatives to promote analytic burden sharing with foreign allies and partners.




Change 1, 09/21/2020                           9                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CCDR            Combatant Commander
CCMD            Combatant Command
CJCS            Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


DIA             Defense Intelligence Agency
DIAAE           Defense Intelligence All-Source Analysis Enterprise
DIAAE BOG       Defense Intelligence All-Source Analysis Enterprise Board of Governors
DoD FM/A        DoD Functional Manager for All-Source Analysis


IC              Intelligence Community


PIR             priority intelligence requirement


USD(AT&L)       Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I&S)        Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
USD(P)          Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

all-source analysis. Defined in Reference (l).

analytic alignment. The mission, objective, priority, geographic, state or non-state actor, or
functional area against which a Defense Intelligence all-source analysis center's analytic
responsibilities and efforts are directed.

analytic output. All intelligence derived from the all-source analytic process regardless of the
format (written, digital, visual or verbal) in which it is provided to the consumer.

Defense Intelligence. Defined in Reference (a).

DIAAE. The collective set of all DoD organizations that execute all-source analysis activities in
production of Defense Intelligence.

DIAAE BOG. A body comprised of representatives of the organizations comprising the DIAAE
that provides a forum for issue identification and resolution; improving transparency and


Change 1, 09/21/2020                             10                           GLOSSARY
                                                           DoDI 3115.17, November 16, 2016


synchronization across the DIAAE; implementing DIAAE strategies and processes; providing
support to the DoD FM/A; and making resource recommendations based on changes to priorities
and emerging requirements.

PIR. Defined in the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference (t)).




Change 1, 09/21/2020                         11                          GLOSSARY
