                                Department of Defense
                                     DIRECTIVE
                                                                              NUMBER 5141.02
                                                                                February 2, 2009

                                                                                            DA&M

SUBJECT: Director of Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

     a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5141.2 (Reference (a)) to update the responsibilities
and functions, relationships, and authorities of the DOT&E under the authority vested in the
Secretary of Defense by sections 113 and 139 of title 10, United States Code (Reference (b)).

     b. Authorizes the DOT&E, as a Principal Staff Assistant (PSA) reporting directly to the
Secretary of Defense, to promulgate DoD policy in DoD Instructions (DoDIs) within the
responsibilities, functions, and authorities assigned herein.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies,
the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense
(hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS. The DOT&E is the PSA and advisor to the
Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense for the responsibilities and functions described
herein. The DOT&E shall:

       a. Perform the duties prescribed in, and as limited by, sections 139 and 2399 of Reference
(b).

    b. Prescribe policies and procedures for the conduct of live fire test and evaluation
(LFT&E).
                                                               DoDD 5141.02, February 2, 2009

   c. Issue guidance to and consult with the Heads of the DoD Components with respect to
LFT&E and related required facilities and resources.

     d. Advise the DoD Executive Agent for Space and the acquiring DoD Component on test
and evaluation (T&E) of DoD Space Major Defense Acquisition Programs and other space
programs designated for T&E oversight in support of DoDD 3100.10 (Reference (c)).

     e. Designate, for the Secretary of Defense, those covered systems and major munitions or
missile programs that are deemed covered product improvement programs subject to the
requirements of section 2366 of Reference (b).

     f. For the Secretary of Defense, prepare reports to Congress as required by section 2366(d)
of Reference (b).

     g. Provide reports, as deemed necessary, to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense,
the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)), and
other appropriate officials in support of system acquisition reviews.

     h. Monitor and advise the Secretary of Defense concerning:

          (1) The capability and resources of the operational test agencies (OTAs) to
adequately plan, execute, and report on operational test and evaluation (OT&E).

           (2) DoD and DoD Component management of, and investment in, targets and threat
surrogates used for OT&E and LFT&E to ensure operational realism.

          (3) The OT&E and LFT&E of functional capability area roadmaps.

     i. Manage the following:

           (1) The efforts to improve interoperability and information assurance in the
Department through the operational evaluation of the systems under oversight and major
exercises conducted by the Combatant Commands and the Military Departments.

          (2) The Joint Test and Evaluation (JT&E) Program.

          (3) The Joint Live Fire Program.

          (4) The Center for Countermeasures.

          (5) The activities of the Joint Aircraft Survivability Program.

          (6) The activities of the Joint Technical Coordinating Group for Munitions
Effectiveness and produce the Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manual.




                                                2
                                                                DoDD 5141.02, February 2, 2009

           (7) The activities of the T&E Threat Resource Activity.

           (8) The Target Management Initiative project.

          (9) Such other programs that are established by the DOT&E within the resources
provided by the Secretary of Defense.

      j. In support of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, monitor and advise on the
development of the Information Operations Range and infrastructure. Establish supporting
policies and procedures and oversee events that are executed on the Information Operations
Range.

     k. Prioritize threat system simulation development projects to be initiated under the Central
Test and Evaluation Investment Program (CTEIP), subject to availability of funds.

      l. Provide the co-chair for the Resource Enhancement Project (REP) working group.
Prioritize candidate projects to be initiated in the REP under the CTEIP.

     m. Oversee the implementation of the testing in a joint environment roadmap.

    n. Provide support to the Director, Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat
Organization, consistent with DoDD 2000.19E (Reference (d)).

      o. Assist the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in efforts to ensure the expected joint
operational mission environment, mission-level measures of effectiveness, and key performance
parameters are specified in Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System documents in
terms that are verifiable through testing or analysis in support of Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff Instruction 3170.01F (Reference (e)).

    p. Oversee and assess operational capability demonstrations conducted by the Missile
Defense Agency (MDA), consistent with DoDD 5134.9 (Reference (f)).

      q. Establish policy on the verification, validation, and accreditation of models and
simulations used in support of OT&E and LFT&E, in compliance with DoDI 5000.02 (Reference
(g)).

     r. Oversee the International T&E (IT&E) Program for the Secretary of Defense.

           (1) Approve activities authorized under international agreements for reciprocal use of
ranges and resources, cooperative T&E programs, project equipment transfers, cooperative
project personnel and familiarization visits, and international test operations procedures (ITOPS).

           (2) Chair the IT&E Steering Committee for ITOPS.




                                                 3
                                                              DoDD 5141.02, February 2, 2009

     s. Oversee and prescribe policy, as appropriate, to ensure protection of human subjects and
adherence to ethical standards are adequately addressed and verified in OT&E and LFT&E, in
support of DoDD 3216.02 (Reference (h)).

      t. Promote coordination, cooperation, and mutual understanding within the Department of
Defense and among the Department of Defense and other Federal Agencies; State, local, and
foreign governments; and the civilian community with regard to DOT&E matters.

     u. Perform such other duties as the Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Defense may
prescribe.


5. RELATIONSHIPS

      a. DOT&E. In the performance of assigned responsibilities and functions, the DOT&E
shall:

          (1) Report directly to the Secretary of Defense.

          (2) Serve as a permanent member of the Deputy Secretary of Defense-chartered T&E
Executive Agent Board of Directors.

         (3) Chair the Senior Advisory Council and the Executive Steering Group for the
JT&E Program.

           (4) Coordinate with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)) to facilitate efficient development and sustainment of operational test and training
infrastructure and to promote combined testing and training events, in support of DoDD 1322.18
and DoDD 3200.15 (References (i) and (j)).

          (5) Use existing systems, facilities, and services of the Department of Defense and
other Federal Agencies, when possible, to avoid duplication and achieve maximum efficiency
and economy.

          (6) Coordinate with the Director, Test Resource Management Center (TRMC),
through the USD(AT&L), on all T&E facility and resource matters as prescribed herein that
affect TRMC responsibilities, as specified in DoDD 5105.71 (Reference (k)).

           (7) Coordinate proposed international agreements supporting the IT&E Program with
the Director, International Cooperation, under the USD(AT&L).

          (8) Coordinate, with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and
Information Integration/DoD Chief Information Officer (ASD(NII)/DoD CIO), the Military
Departments, the Combatant Commands, and the National Security Agency, the planning and
conduct of information assurance and interoperability assessments conducted in conjunction with
Military Department and Combatant Command major exercises.


                                               4
                                                                  DoDD 5141.02, February 2, 2009



            (9) Coordinate and exchange information with other DoD officials exercising
collateral or related responsibilities and functions.

      b. Other OSD officials and the Heads of the DoD Components. The other OSD officials
and the Heads of the DoD Components shall coordinate with the DOT&E on all matters under
their purview related to the authorities, responsibilities, and functions assigned in this Directive.
The Heads of the DoD Components, as appropriate, shall report promptly to the DOT&E all
activities affecting the resources and facilities used for OT&E and LFT&E.

      c. Secretaries of the Military Departments. The Secretaries of the Military Departments
shall perform their duties as prescribed in section 139 of Reference (b). Additionally, the
Secretaries of the Military Departments shall report promptly to the DOT&E the results of all
LFT&E events for covered systems conducted by the Military Departments and on all studies
conducted by the Military Departments in connection with LFT&E activities.

     d. Director, MDA. The Director, MDA, shall perform duties as prescribed in section 139
of Reference (b).

       e. IG, DoD. The IG, DoD, shall perform duties as prescribed in section 2399 of Reference
(b).


6. AUTHORITIES. Under the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to
his/her authority, direction, and control, and in accordance with DoD policies and issuances, the
DOT&E is hereby delegated authority to exercise, within assigned responsibilities and functions,
all authority of the Secretary of Defense derived from statute, Executive order, or interagency
agreement, except where specifically limited by statute or Executive order to the Secretary of
Defense. The DOT&E is hereby delegated authority to:

     a. Comply with requests from Congress for information relating to T&E in the Department
of Defense.

      b. Co-approve the DoD Test and Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP), T&E Strategy (TES),
and T&E portions of integrated program management documents with the USD(AT&L) for
major and other designated defense acquisition programs, and with the ASD(NII)/DoD CIO for
major and other designated automated information systems. Approve the TEMP, TES, or T&E
portions of the integrated program management documents for programs that are solely under
DOT&E oversight. Approve Test Plans for operational test events of acquisition systems under
DOT&E oversight.

      c. Approve LFT&E strategies and, if developed in support of waivers of full-up system-
level live fire testing, alternative LFT&E strategies.

      d. Act for the Secretary of Defense regarding cooperative agreements for reciprocal use of
test facilities under section 2350l of Reference (b).


                                                  5
                                                               DoDD 5141.02, February 2, 2009



     e. Determine the quantity of articles to be procured for operational testing for systems on
the OSD T&E oversight list.

     f. Co-chair, with the USD(P&R), the Defense Test and Training Steering Group.

      g. Issue, in DoDIs, DoD policy within the responsibilities, functions, and authorities
assigned herein, including authority to identify collateral responsibilities of OSD officials and
the Heads of the DoD Components. Such Instructions shall be fully coordinated in accordance
with DoDI 5025.01 (Reference (l)). This authority may not be redelegated. Further, in areas of
assigned responsibilities and functions, the DOT&E has authority to issue other DoDIs, DoD
Manuals, and one-time Directive-Type Memorandums, consistent with Reference (l), that
implement policy approved by the Secretary of Defense. Instructions to the Military
Departments shall be issued through the Secretaries of the Military Departments. Instructions to
the Combatant Commands shall be communicated through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.

      h. Communicate with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry out
assigned responsibilities and functions, including the transmission of requests for advice and
assistance. Communications to the Military Departments shall be through the Secretaries of the
Military Departments, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law or directed by the
Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, except as provided for in memorandums of agreement concerning
personnel support, shall be transmitted through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

     i. Obtain reports and information, consistent with DoDI 8910.01 (Reference (m)), as
necessary in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions.

    j. Establish arrangements for DoD participation in non-defense governmental programs for
which the DOT&E is assigned primary cognizance.

     k. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives and members of the
Legislative Branch, members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments, as
appropriate, in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with
representatives of the Legislative Branch shall be coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Legislative Affairs or the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial
Officer, Department of Defense, as appropriate, and be consistent with the DoD Legislative
Program, as appropriate.


7. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Directive is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.




                                                6
                                                         DoDD 5141.02, February 2, 2009

8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosures
     References
     Glossary




                                           7
                                                            DoDD 5141.02 February 2, 2009

                                       ENCLOSURE

                                      REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5141.2, “Director of Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E),”
      May 25, 2000 (hereby canceled)
(b)   Sections 113, 139, 2366, 2399, and 23501 of title 10, United States Code
(c)   DoD Directive 3100.10, “Space Policy,” July 9, 1999
(d)   DoD Directive 2000.19E, “Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization
      (JIEDDO),” February 14, 2006
(e)   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3170.01F, “Joint Capabilities
      Integration and Development System,” 1 May 2007
(f)   DoD Directive 5134.9, “Missile Defense Agency (MDA),” October 9, 2004
(g)   DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,”
      December 8, 2008
(h)   DoD Directive 3216.02, “Protection of Human Subjects and Adherence to Ethical
      Standards in DoD-Supported Research,” March 25, 2002
(i)   DoD Directive 1322.18, “Military Training,” September 3, 2004
(j)   DoD Directive 3200.15, “Sustainment of Ranges and Operating Areas (OPAREAs),”
      January 10, 2003
(k)   DoD Directive 5105.71, “Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center
      (TRMC),” March 8, 2004
(l)   DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Directives Program,” October 28, 2007
(m)   DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,” March 6, 2007




                                             8                               ENCLOSURE
                                                           DoDD 5141.02 February 2, 2009



                                        GLOSSARY

                     PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(NII)/DoD CIO Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information
                 Integration/DoD Chief Information Officer

CTEIP               Central Test and Evaluation Investment Program

DoDD                DoD Directive
DoDIs               DoD Instructions
DOT&E               Director of Operational Test and Evaluation

IG, DoD             Inspector General of the Department of Defense
IT&E                International T&E
ITOPS               international test operations procedures

JT&E                Joint Test and Evaluation

LFT&E               live fire test and evaluation

MDA                 Missile Defense Agency

OTAs                operational test agencies
OT&E                operational test and evaluation

PSA                 Principal Staff Assistant

REP                 Resource Enhancement Project

T&E                 test and evaluation
TEMP                Test and Evaluation Master Plan
TES                 T&E Strategy
TRMC                Test Resource Management Center

USD(AT&L)           Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(P&R)            Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness




                                                9                              GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 5141.02 February 2, 2009



                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

LFT&E. Realistic survivability or lethality testing, as defined in section 2366(e) of Reference
(b); and the evaluation of the results of such testing.

OTA. The Army Test and Evaluation Command, the Navy Operational Test and Evaluation
Force, the Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center, the Marine Corps Operational Test
and Evaluation Activity, and the Joint Interoperability Test Command.

OT&E. Defined in section 139(a)(2)(A) of Reference (b) as the field test, under realistic combat
conditions, of any item of (or key component of) weapons, equipment, or munitions for the
purpose of determining the effectiveness and suitability of the weapons, equipment, or munitions
for use in combat by typical military users; and the evaluation of the results of such test.




                                                10                                   GLOSSARY
