                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 1344.08
                                                                                 March 11, 2009
                                                         Incorporating Change 2, March 25, 2020

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Interment Allowance for Deceased Military Personnel

References: (a) DoD Directive 1344.8, “Interment Allowance for Deceased Active Duty
                Personnel,” September 25, 1978 (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
            (c) Chapter 75 of title 10, United States Code
            (d) DoD Instruction 1300.18, “Department of Defense (DoD) Personnel Casualty
                Matters, Policies, and Procedures,” January 8, 2008, as amended



1. PURPOSE. This Instruction reissues Reference (a) as a DoD Instruction in accordance with
the authority in Reference (b) to establish policy and assign responsibilities to ensure that
survivors of military personnel are reimbursed for interment expenses on a uniform basis.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Instruction, Interment expenses are those expenses
typically incurred incident to the death of a member covered by section 1481 of Reference (c)
and authorized to be paid or reimbursed under the provisions of section 1482 of Reference (c).
Such expenses include not only those specifically listed in the law, but also any other usual and
customary expense clearly associated with and appropriate to the recovery, care, and disposition
of the member’s remains, including cremation and associated inurnment expenses and, when a
Military Department determines that remains are non-recoverable, those expenses associated
with a memorial service.
                                                                   DoDI 1344.08, March 11, 2009


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Unless otherwise requested, arrangements for interment of deceased active duty personnel
will be made by the person authorized to direct disposition of human remains as defined in DoD
Instruction 1300.18 (Reference (d)). The Military Departments will provide advice and
assistance as appropriate.

    b. Individuals shall be reimbursed by the Military Departments for usual and customary
expenses they incur incident to a member’s death that are typically associated with recovery,
care, and disposition of remains. No amount shall be paid for expenses not actually incurred,
including services provided without charge, such as the cost of preparation of the body when
performed or directly paid by the Military Departments.

    c. Rates authorized for reimbursable allowances shall not be larger than those normally
incurred by the Military Departments in furnishing the supply or service concerned.

    d. Currently authorized rates for reimbursable allowances are listed in the Enclosure. They
shall be reviewed not less often than every 2 years and new rates published if significant changes
have occurred.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(PDUSD(P&R)). The PDUSD(P&R), under the authority, direction, and control of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall approve and publish reasonable and
adequate uniform DoD monetary rates for reimbursable allowances based on the reviews and
reports prescribed in section 5.b. Maximum authorized rates of reimbursement allowances may
be specified according to a structure consistent with the way costs are normally incurred and
related, such as when burial is in a private cemetery versus in a national or other government
cemetery.

    b. Secretary of the Army. The Secretary of the Army, in coordination with the Secretaries of
the Navy and the Air Force, shall conduct reviews, consistent with the policy stated in sections
4.c. and 4.d., to determine the adequacy of interment allowances and report the results to the
PDUSD(P&R) within 30 days of the completion of each review. Each report will include, at a
minimum, a recommendation of the adequacy of the current reimbursement allowances and an
analysis of cost data for interment, comparing the current allowance rates with current interment
costs incurred by the Military Departments and those in the civilian community.

    c. Secretaries of the Military Departments. The Secretaries of the Military Departments
shall be constrained by the maximum authorized rates of reimbursement published by the
PDUSD(P&R) when providing reimbursement under Reference (c). They shall conduct periodic
internal reviews to ensure the adequacy of interment allowances. The Secretaries of the Air
Force and Navy shall report the results of the reviews prescribed in section 5.b., to the Secretary
of the Army.



Change 2, 03/25/2020                             2
                                                            DoDI 1344.08, March 11, 2009


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The reporting requirement described in section 5.b.
has been assigned Report Control Symbol DD-P&R(BI)894


7. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This Instruction is updated to remove expiration language in
accordance with current Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense direction.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective March 11, 2009.




Enclosure
   Interment Allowances




Change 2, 03/25/2020                        3
                                                                   DoDI 1344.08, March 11, 2009


                                          ENCLOSURE

                                 INTERMENT ALLOWANCES


                 Interment Allowances – Effective upon issuance of Change 1
                                                                                     then the
                                                                                    maximum
When            and a responsible individual pays the expenses for                reimbursable
                                                                                   amount is:
                remains that are consigned to a funeral home, and burial is in
a Military      a private cemetery                                                  $9,000
Department
arranges for    remains that are consigned to a funeral home, and burial is in
                a national or other government cemetery                             $6,000
preparation
and casket
                remains that are consigned directly for burial in a national or
                other government cemetery                                           $2,500

a responsible
                burial in a private cemetery                                        $10,500
individual
arranges for
preparation     burial in a national or other government cemetery                   $9,000
and casket




Change 2, 03/25/2020                           4                                  ENCLOSURE
