                              Department of Defense
                                     DIRECTIVE

                                                                               NUMBER 1332.27
                                                                                     June 26, 2003
                                                             Certified Current as of April 23, 2007

                                                                                        USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Survivor Annuity Programs for the Uniformed Services

References: (a) Chapter 73 of title 10, United States Code
            (b) DoD Directive 1332.27, "Survivor Benefit Plan," January 4, 1974 (hereby
                canceled)
            (c) DoD Instruction 1332.42, "Survivor Annuity Program Administration,"
                August 24, 2004


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

Pursuant to the authority provided in reference (a), this Directive reissues reference (b) to update
the responsibilities, functions, authorities, and relationships as outlined below and authorizes the
publication of DoD Instruction 1332.42 (reference (c)).


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments
(including the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a Military Service in the Navy by
agreement with the Department of Homeland Security), the Commissioned Corps of the Public
Health Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration under agreements
with the Departments of Health and Human Services and Commerce, the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Defense Agencies, and all other organizational
entities in the Department of Defense. The term "Military Services," as used herein, refers to the
Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.


3. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:
                                                                     DoDD 1332.27, June 26, 2003


    3.1. All members and their survivors, as applicable, are informed of the Survivor Annuity
Programs.

      3.2. The Military Departments, within the limits of available resources and expertise, shall
inform and educate persons eligible for the Survivor Annuity Programs. It is especially
important that military personnel be educated with respect to these matters prior to eligibility for
retirement.

    3.3. The Survivor Annuity Programs as provided in reference (a) are effectively
implemented.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

It is DoD policy that:

     4.1. The Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and Readiness), under
the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall manage this Directive and
implementation of reference (c).

     4.2. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall ensure compliance with this
Directive and establish policies and procedures to implement reference (c).


5. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




                                                 2
