                              Department of Defense
                                 DIRECTIVE

                                                                               NUMBER 2000.13
                                                                                  March 11, 2014
                                                             Incorporating Change 1, May 15, 2017

                                                                                              USD(P)

SUBJECT:      Civil Affairs

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 2000.13 (Reference (a)) to update
established policy and assigned responsibilities for conducting DoD-wide civil affairs operations
in accordance with sections 167, 401, 404, and 2011 of Title 10, United States Code (Reference
(b)), DoDD 5111.10 (Reference (c)), and DoDD 5100.01 (Reference (d)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to
collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The DoD must maintain a capability to conduct a broad range of civil affairs operations
necessary to support DoD missions and to meet DoD Component responsibilities to the civilian
sector in the operational environment across the range of military operations. Civil affairs
operations include, but are not limited to, DoD actions that:

        (1) Coordinate military activities with other U.S. Government departments and agencies,
civilian agencies of other governments, host-nation military or paramilitary elements, and non-
governmental organizations.

        (2) Support stability operations, including activities that establish civil security; provide
support to governance; provide essential services; support economic development and
infrastructure; and establish civil control for civilian populations in occupied or liberated areas
until such control can be returned to civilian or non-U.S. military authority.
                                                                   DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014


         (3) Provide assistance outside the range of military operations, when directed, to meet
the life-sustaining needs of the civilian population.

        (4) Provide expertise in civilian sector functions that normally are the responsibility of
civilian authorities. That expertise is applied to implement DoD policies to advise or assist in
rehabilitating or restoring civilian sector functions.

        (5) Establish and conduct military government until civilian authority or government can
be restored.

    b. Civil affairs operations are used to help fulfill DoD responsibilities to civilian populations
under applicable U.S. and international law by minimizing, to the extent feasible, civilian
interference with military operations and the unintended harmful effects of military operations on
the civilian population.

    c. Civil affairs operations enable an orderly and prompt transition of civilian sector
responsibilities from the DoD Components to non-DoD authorities.

    d. Civil affairs operations may be conducted to support national policies and interests as part
of an interagency, bilateral, or multinational military or political-military operation, in
accordance with law and consistent with applicable DoD policy and issuances.

       (1) DoD Components may make DoD civil affairs capabilities available to other U.S.
Government agencies for such operations in accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 1000.17
(Reference (e)), DoDI 4000.19 (Reference (f)), DoDD S-5210.36 (Reference (g)), and
Presidential Policy Directive 23 (Reference (h)).

        (2) By mutual agreement, resources from non-DoD departments and agencies may be
used to augment DoD civil affairs capabilities in accordance with Reference (f).

    e. Before civil affairs operations are conducted, decision makers consider the long-term
effect on current U.S. security policy goals and objectives in general, and on the host country in
particular.

   f. Military commanders are responsible for integrating civil affairs into military operations,
programs, and activities.

    g. Military forces must not undertake civilian sector rehabilitation activities, in accordance
with paragraph 3a(4) of this section, and military government activities, in accordance with
paragraph 3a(5) of this section, unless directed by the Secretary of Defense. However, this
prohibition does not prevent the DoD Component heads from planning for such missions. Nor
does it prohibit the use of military forces to support approved:

       (1) Humanitarian and civic assistance provided in conjunction with military operations.

       (2) Exercises in accordance with DoDI 2205.02 (Reference (i)).



Change 1, 05/15/2017                             2
                                                                  DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014


       (3) Disaster relief operations conducted in accordance with DoDD 5100.46
(Reference (j)).

         (4) Humanitarian actions that provide for the immediate response to prevent the loss of
life, property, and needless suffering.

       (5) Stability operations in accordance with DoDI 3000.05 (Reference (k)).

   h. DoD civil affairs capabilities may be used to assist in domestic emergencies and to
provide other support to domestic civil authorities consistent with law and in accordance with
DoDD 3025.18 (Reference (l)), DoDI 3025.21 (Reference (m)), other DoD issuances, and
supporting plans.

    i. Joint force commanders integrate civil affairs forces with other military forces (e.g.,
maneuver, health service, military police or security, engineering, transportation, and special
operations forces) to work alongside host-nation agencies, military, and security forces (e.g.,
national, border, and local police) and to support unified action by interacting and consulting
with other government agencies, indigenous populations and institutions, intergovernmental
organizations, non-governmental organizations, host nations, foreign nations, and the private
sector to provide the capabilities needed for successful civil military operations.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective March 11, 2014.




                                                 Christine H. Fox
                                                 Acting Deputy Secretary of Defense




Change 1, 05/15/2017                             3
                             DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014


Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 05/15/2017     4
                                                            DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 2000.13, “Civil Affairs,” June 27, 1994 (hereby cancelled)
(b) Title 10, United States Code
(c) DoD Directive 5111.10, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-
    Intensity Conflict (ASD(SO/LIC)),” March 22, 1995, as amended
(d) DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major
    Components,” December 21, 2010
(e) DoD Instruction 1000.17, “Detail of DoD Personnel to Duty Outside the Department of
    Defense,” October 30, 2013
(f) DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” April 25, 2013
(g) DoD Directive S-5210.36, “Provision of DoD Sensitive Support to DoD Components and
    Other Departments and Agencies of the U.S. Government (U),” November 6, 2008
(h) Presidential Policy Directive 23, “Security Sector Assistance,” April 5, 2013
(i) DoD Instruction 2205.02, “Humanitarian and Civic Assistance (HCA) Activities,” June 23,
    2014
(j) DoD Directive 5100.46, “Foreign Disaster Relief (FDR),” July 6, 2012
(k) DoD Instruction 3000.05, “Stability Operations,” September 16, 2009
(l) DoD Directive 3025.18, “Defense Support of Civil Authorities (DSCA),”
    December 29, 2010, as amended
(m) DoD Instruction 3025.21, “Defense Support of Civilian Law Enforcement Agencies,”
    February 27, 2013
(n) DoD Directive 1200.17, “Managing the Reserve Components as an Operational Force,”
    October 29, 2008
(o) DoD Instruction 1235.12, “Accessing the Reserve Components (RC),” June 7, 2016, as
    amended
(p) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Designation of United States Special Operations
    Command (USSOCOM) as Joint Proponent for Civil Affairs (CA),” April 27, 2009




Change 1, 05/15/2017                         5                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014


                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                        RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW
INTENSITY CONFLICT (ASD(SO/LIC)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the
Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), the ASD(SO/LIC):

    a. Acts as the principal civilian advisor to the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P) on the
policy and planning for DoD civil affairs operations.

   b. Translates national security policy objectives into specific defense policy objectives
achievable through civil affairs operations.

   c. Formulates DoD civil affairs policies and programs for plans, resources, and
implementation of civil affairs operations.

   d. Oversees the implementation of DoD civil affairs policies and programs.

    e. Provides policy advice and assistance to and coordinates with other Principal Staff
Assistants about civil affairs operations and the use of civil affairs capabilities for their assigned
regional or functional responsibilities and in support of stability operations activities, in
accordance with Reference (k) and DoDD 1200.17 (Reference (n)).

    f. Acts as the OSD point of contact for DoD civil affairs operations that relate to the
activities of other U.S. Government departments and agencies, international organizations, and
non-governmental organizations. Monitors interagency use of DoD forces for civil affairs
operations, and reports to the Secretary of Defense whenever it appears that questions may arise
with respect to the legality or propriety of such use.

   g. Reviews program recommendations and budget proposals from the Secretaries of the
Military Departments and the Commander, U.S. Special Operations Command (USSOCOM),
and provides recommendations on them to the Secretary of Defense.

    h. In coordination with the DoD Executive Secretary, coordinates the detail of civil affairs
personnel to duty with other U.S. Government departments and agencies and other non-DoD
organizations, in accordance with Reference (e).


2. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

   a. Develop and maintain programs necessary to plan, conduct, and support civil affairs
operations to meet their Military Service and Combatant Command requirements.




Change 1, 05/15/2017                               6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014


    b. Provide for civil affairs personnel in their force structures. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments with civil affairs units and personnel in their Reserve Components must provide for
the timely mobilization and activation of such units and personnel as required to perform civil
affairs operations in accordance with DoD Instruction 1235.12 (Reference (o)).

   c. Assume DoD-wide responsibilities for specific civil affairs missions when directed by the
Secretary of Defense.

    d. In coordination with the Commander, USSOCOM, conduct specialized civil affairs
education and individual training for assigned officers and noncommissioned officers and non-
assigned DoD and non-DoD personnel.


3. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. In addition to the responsibilities in section 3 of this
enclosure, the Secretary of the Army:

  a. In coordination with the Commander, USSOCOM, recruits, organizes, trains, equips,
mobilizes, and sustains Army civil affairs forces.

    b. In coordination with the CJCS and the Commander, USSOCOM, provides for civil affairs
personnel and units in the Army military force structure that are capable of providing functional
expertise in civilian sector disciplines necessary for civil assistance and military government
missions.

   c. In accordance with the CJCS-validated requirements and Secretary of Defense
Memorandum (Reference (p)), provides for the timely activation and mobilization of Army
Reserve civil affairs units or personnel required to perform civil affairs operations in the
accomplishment of Combatant Command missions.

    d. Provides U.S. Army personnel qualified in civil affairs to the other Military Departments,
at their request and under a mutually approved and signed Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) or Memorandum of Agreement (MOA), in coordination with the CJCS.


4. SECRETARY OF THE NAVY. In addition to the responsibilities in section 3 of this
enclosure, the Secretary of the Navy:

  a. In coordination with the Commander, USSOCOM, recruits, organizes, trains, equips,
mobilizes, and sustains Navy and Marine Corps civil affairs forces.

    b. In coordination with the CJCS and the Commander, USSOCOM, provides for civil affairs
personnel and units in the Navy and Marine Corps military force structure.

   c. In accordance with the CJCS-validated requirements and Reference (n), provides for the
timely activation and mobilization of Navy and Marine Corps Reserve civil affairs units or




Change 1, 05/15/2017                              7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014


personnel required to perform civil affairs operations in the accomplishment of Combatant
Command missions.

   d. Provides Navy and Marine Corps personnel qualified in civil affairs to the other Military
Departments, at their request and under a mutually approved and signed MOU or MOA, in
coordination with the CJCS.


5. CJCS. The CJCS:

   a. As the principal military advisor to the President, the National Security Council, and the
Secretary of Defense, provides advice on civil affairs operations.

    b. Provides guidance to the Combatant Commanders for the preparation and review of civil
affairs plans.

    c. Develops, establishes, and distributes joint civil affairs strategy, doctrine, tactics,
techniques, and procedures.

    d. Formulates policies for coordinating joint training in civil affairs operations.


6. COMBATANT COMMANDERS. The Combatant Commanders:

   a. Plan, support, and conduct civil affairs operations in their areas of responsibility. These
operations must:

        (1) Support the missions and objectives of the supported Combatant Commanders.

        (2) Support the goals and programs of other U.S. Government departments and agencies
related to civil affairs consistent with those authorities governing DoD involvement.

      (3) Provide for training of U.S. civil affairs forces within their areas of responsibility.
Coordinate the training with the Secretaries of the Military Departments and Commander,
USSOCOM, for assigned civil affairs units and personnel.

       (4) Coordinate and liaise with other U.S. Government departments and agencies
operating in their areas of responsibility.

    b. Ensure the integration of civil affairs operations into military plans.

    c. Designate a staff element with responsibility for coordinating civil affairs operations.


7. COMMANDER, USSOCOM. In addition to the responsibilities in section 6 of this
enclosure, the Commander, USSOCOM:



Change 1, 05/15/2017                               8                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014



   a. Acts as the joint proponent for civil affairs with coordinating authority in accordance with
Reference (p). These responsibilities include:

       (1) Assisting the CJCS by leading the development of joint civil affairs doctrine.

       (2) Leading the development of joint civil affairs training and education for individuals
and units.

       (3) Leading the identification of required joint civil affairs capabilities across all
warfighting domains.

       (4) Leading the development of joint civil affairs mission essential task lists.

       (5) Leading the development of joint civil affairs strategy.

       (6) Coordinating with the Military Services and Combatant Commands to develop
standards ensuring interoperability of joint civil affairs forces and equipment.

        (7) Coordinating with the ASD(SO/LIC) and the Joint Staff to consult with other U.S.
Government departments and agencies on civil affairs-related initiatives, strategies, concepts,
plans, and policies.

       (8) Assisting the USD(P&R) in identifying critical civil affairs skills, training, and
experience.

    b. Provides, from USSOCOM-assigned forces, other Combatant Commanders with civil
affairs forces that are organized, trained, and equipped to plan and conduct civil affairs
operations in support of their missions.

    c. Trains and organizes assigned civil affairs forces, and monitors their preparedness to carry
out assigned missions of special operation forces.

   d. Prepares and submits to the Secretary of Defense program recommendations and budget
proposals for special operations forces’ unique activities and equipment for assigned forces.

    e. Exercises authority, direction, and control over spending funds for special operations
forces’ unique activities and equipment for assigned civil affairs forces.

    f. Under the direction of the CJCS, assists in developing joint civil affairs strategy, doctrine,
tactics, techniques, and procedures.

    g. Conducts specialized joint civil affairs professional education and individual training for
assigned officer and noncommissioned officers and non-assigned DoD and non-DoD personnel.

   h. Establishes standards to ensure interoperability of civil affairs equipment and forces.



Change 1, 05/15/2017                              9                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ASD(SO/LIC) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and
            Low Intensity Conflict

CJCS             Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DoDD             Department of Defense directive
DoDI             Department of Defense instruction

MOA              Memorandum of Agreement
MOU              Memorandum of Understanding

USD(P)           Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)         Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USSOCOM          U.S. Special Operations Command


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

civil affairs forces. Designated active and Reserve Component forces and units organized,
trained, and equipped specifically to conduct civil affairs operations and to support civil-military
operations.

civil affairs capabilities. Civil affairs forces and other DoD units and organizations that are
capable of planning, conducting, or otherwise assisting in civil affairs operations.

civil affairs operations. Those military operations conducted by civil affairs forces that enhance
the relationship between military forces and civil authorities in localities where military forces
are present; require interaction and consultation with other interagency organizations,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations, indigenous populations and
institutions, and the private sector; and involve application of functional specialty skills that
normally are the responsibility of civil government to enhance the conduct of civil-military
operations.

civil-military operations. The activities of a commander that establish, maintain, influence, or
exploit relations between military forces, governmental and non-governmental civilian
organizations and authorities, and the civilian populace in a friendly, neutral, or hostile
operational area in order to facilitate military operations and to consolidate and achieve
operational U.S. objectives. Civil-military operations may include performance by military
forces of activities and functions normally the responsibility of the local, regional, or national
government. These activities may occur before, during, or after other military actions. They



Change 1, 05/15/2017                             10                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                    DoDD 2000.13, March 11, 2014


may also occur, if directed, in the absence of other military operations. Civil-military operations
may be performed by designated civil affairs, by other military forces, or by a combination of
civil affairs and other forces.

defense support of civil authorities. Defined in Reference (l).

humanitarian and civic assistance. Assistance to the local populace provided by predominantly
U.S. forces in conjunction with military operations and exercises. This assistance is specifically
authorized by section 401 of Reference (b) and funded under separate authorities.

military government. The form of administration by which a military commander exercises
executive, legislative, and judicial authority over foreign territory, such as occupied territory of
the enemy or allied territory recovered from enemy occupation.




Change 1, 05/15/2017                             11                                     GLOSSARY
