                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 5200.47E
                                                                             September 4, 2015
                                                     Incorporating Change 3, December 22, 2020

                                                                                      USD(R&E)

SUBJECT:     Anti-Tamper (AT)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

    a. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for AT protection of critical program
information (CPI) in accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5000.02 (Reference (a)) and
DoDI 5200.39 (Reference (b)).

   b. Designates the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
(USD(AT&L)) as the Principal Staff Assistant (PSA) responsible for oversight of the DoD AT
program and policy, in accordance with the DoD Directive (DoDD) 5101.1 (Reference (c)).

   c. Designates the Secretary of the Air Force (SECAF) as the DoD Executive Agent (EA) for
AT in accordance with Reference (c).

   d. Incorporates and cancels USD(AT&L) memorandums (References (d) and (e)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD
Components”).

   b. All DoD activities, research, development, test, and evaluation programs, urgent
operational needs programs, international cooperative programs, foreign military sales, direct
commercial sales, excess defense article transfers, and any other exports in which CPI is resident
within the end item.
                                                              DoDD 5200.47E, September 4, 2015


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

    a. Deter, impede, detect, and respond to the exploitation of CPI based on the consequence of
CPI compromise and the anticipated system exposure through the application of cost-effective,
risk-based protections, to include AT when warranted, in accordance with Reference (b).

    b. Support the sale or transfer of certain defense articles to foreign governments and their
participating contractors while preserving U.S. and foreign investments in CPI through the
implementation of AT, in accordance with References (a) and (b).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this directive to the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering in accordance
with the December 17, 2020 email from Christopher Choate (Reference (o)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective September 4, 2015.




                                                  Robert O. Work
                                                  Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 3, 12/22/2020                             2
                                                                       DoDD 5200.47E, September 4, 2015


                                                ENCLOSURE 1

                                                REFERENCES


(a)     DoD Instruction 5000.02T, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,” January 7,
        2015, as amended
(b)     DoD Instruction 5200.39, “Critical Program Information (CPI) Identification and
        Protection Within Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E),” May 28,
        2015, as amended
(c)     DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(d)     Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology Memorandum,
        “Implementation of Anti-Tamper (AT) Techniques in Acquisition Programs,” February 4,
        1999 (hereby cancelled)
(e)     Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Memorandum,
        “Implementing Anti-Tamper (AT),” January 5, 2001 (hereby cancelled)
(f)     Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
        Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
        of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(g)     DoD Instruction S-5230.28, “Low Observable (LO) and Counter Low Observable (CLO)
        Programs (U),” December 28, 2016, as amended
(h)     DoD Directive 5205.07, “Special Access Program (SAP) Policy,” July 1, 2010, as amended
(i)     DoD Instruction 5205.11, “Management, Administration, and Oversight of DoD Special
        Access Programs (SAPs),” February 6, 2013, as amended
(j)     DoD Instruction 8500.01, “Cybersecurity,” March 14, 2014, as amended
(k)     DoD Directive 5100.20, “National Security Agency/Central Security Service (NSA/CSS),”
        January 26, 2010
(l)     Defense Security Cooperation Agency Manual 5105.38, “Security Assistance Management
        Manual (SAMM),” April 30, 2012
(m)     DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” September 9, 2020
(n)     Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3170.01H, “Joint Capabilities Integration
        and Development System,” January 10, 2012
(o)     Choate, Christopher. “RE: 5200.47 Transfer action.” Email message to Yasmeen Hargis,
        December 17, 2020 1




1
    Available in the WHS/ESD/Directives Division at whs.mc-alex.esd.mbx.dod-directives-senior-editor@mail.mil


Change 3, 12/22/2020                                    3                                    ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDD 5200.47E, September 4, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(AT&L). As the PSA for AT, the USD(AT&L):

   a. Oversees and directs the DoD EA for AT in accordance with Reference (c).

    b. Establishes policy and provides guidance for research, development (to facilitate early AT
planning and design), test, evaluation, and implementation of AT in coordination with the DoD
EA for AT and the DoD Component offices of primary responsibility (OPRs) for AT.

   c. Provides AT strategic guidance and decision-making in his or her capacity as the Low
Observable and Counter Low Observable (LO/CLO) Executive Committee Chairman in
accordance with DoDI S-5230.28 (Reference (g)).

   d. Guides, reviews, and approves the development strategy for AT technologies.


2. DIRECTOR, SPECIAL PROGRAMS. Under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(AT&L), the Director, Special Programs:

  a. Ensures the application of AT for special access programs in coordination with the DoD
Component heads and in accordance with Reference (b), DoDD 5205.07 (Reference (h)), and
DoDI 5205.11 (Reference (i)).

   b. Confirms the horizontal protection of CPI via AT as the LO/CLO Tri-Service Committee
Chairman in accordance with Reference (g).


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)). The USD(I)
prioritizes, collects, and distributes AT intelligence and counterintelligence (CI), with support
from the DoD Component intelligence organizations, to the DoD EA for AT and the DoD
Component OPRs for AT.


4. DIRECTOR, NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY/CHIEF, CENTRAL SECURITY
SERVICE (DIRNSA/CHCSS). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I) and in
addition to the responsibilities in section 6 of this enclosure, the DIRNSA/CHCSS:

    a. Provides expertise and recommends technologies and tools in support of AT protection
designs and implementations to the DoD EA for AT and DoD Component OPRs for AT.

   b. As part of the cryptography review in DoDI 8500.01 (Reference (j)) and the
communications security review in DoDD 5100.20 (Reference (k)), and in coordination with the



Change 3, 12/22/2020                             4                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                           DoDD 5200.47E, September 4, 2015


DoD EA for AT and the DoD Component OPRs for AT, confirms that cryptographic and
communications security protections are implemented at a level commensurate with the required
level of AT.


5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P):

   a. As the DoD focal point for export controls, implements policies and processes to ensure
AT requirements have been met before export of DoD systems with CPI.

    b. Modifies DoD international policy in response to tamper events identified by the DoD EA
for AT, as appropriate.


6. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

    a. Establish an OPR for the budgeting, execution, security, and management of AT within
their respective Components.

   b. Determine requirements for, plan, design, implement, test, and evaluate AT based on the
consequence of CPI compromise and the anticipated system exposure in accordance with
Reference (b) and in alignment with requirements guidance from the DoD EA for AT.

   c. Contribute to the development of AT architectures and technologies in support of current
and future AT solutions to facilitate early AT planning and design in coordination with the DoD
EA for AT.

    d. Conduct program-independent evaluations of AT implementations, in alignment with
guidance from the DoD EA for AT, in order to verify compliance with program and DoD AT
protection and performance requirements.

   e. Provide AT intelligence and CI support to the USD(I) through the DoD EA for AT.


7. SECAF. In his or her capacity as the DoD EA for AT under the oversight and direction of the
PSA for AT, and in addition to the responsibilities in section 6 of this enclosure, the SECAF:

    a. Develops AT management and technical guidance, to include guidelines for program-
independent evaluations of AT implementations.

   b. Conducts DoD-wide horizontal protection analysis of DoD Component AT planning
documentation. Informs the LO/CLO Tri-Service Committee and the Milestone Decision
Authority of AT-related horizontal protection issues.

   c. Confirms that AT requirements have been met before export of DoD systems with CPI, in
coordination with the USD(P) and the DoD Component heads.



Change 3, 12/22/2020                           5                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                            DoDD 5200.47E, September 4, 2015



  d. Develops acquisition workforce training and education for AT in coordination with the
DoD Component OPRs for AT.

    e. Assesses and ensures the availability of AT architectures and technologies in support of
current and future AT solutions to facilitate early AT planning and design in accordance with
Reference (g).

    f. Maintains and implements DoD AT security classification guidance under the direction of
the Director, Special Programs, in coordination with the DoD Component OPRs for AT.

   g. Develops AT intelligence and CI production and support requirements in coordination
with the USD(I).

   h. Confirms that AT protections and cryptographic protections are implemented at a
commensurate level, in coordination with the DIRNSA/CHCSS.

  i. Manages the effective and efficient resourcing of the DoD EA for AT, as well as DoD
Component program-independent evaluations of AT implementations.




Change 3, 12/22/2020                            6                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 5200.47E, September 4, 2015


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AT                  anti-tamper


CI                  Counterintelligence
CPI                 critical program information


DIRNSA/CHCSS Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
DoDD         DoD Directive
DoDI         DoD Instruction


EA                  executive agent


LO/CLO              low observable and counter low observable


OPR                 office of primary responsibility


PSA                 Principal Staff Assistant


SECAF               Secretary of the Air Force


USD(AT&L)           Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I)              Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)              Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

AT. Systems engineering activities intended to prevent or delay exploitation of CPI in U.S.
defense systems in domestic and export configurations to impede countermeasure development,
unintended technology transfer, or alteration of a system due to reverse engineering.

AT architecture. A subset of the system architecture that implements AT protections with
system-specific and platform-unique considerations. Enables the incorporation of AT concepts,
processes, and technologies into the overall security architecture through an integrated systems
security engineering approach in order to address all aspects of CPI protection.


Change 3, 12/22/2020                             7                             GLOSSARY
                                                            DoDD 5200.47E, September 4, 2015



AT plan. A document to help develop and communicate a program’s AT protection throughout
its lifecycle. Includes the CPI (organic and inherited) criticality and protection level, the
program’s AT concept, AT protection solution set and implementation description, the AT
evaluation plan, and the key management plan, as applicable based upon the maturity of the
program. The AT plan is an appendix to the Program Protection Plan.

commensurate level. An equivalent protection or set of protections.

CPI. Defined in Reference (b).

direct commercial sales. Defined in Defense Security Cooperation Agency Manual 5105.38
(Reference (l)).

excess defense article. Defined in Reference (l).

focal point. Defined in Reference (b).

foreign military sales. Defined in Reference (l).

horizontal protection analysis. Defined in Reference (b).

international cooperative program. Defined in Reference (a).

LO/CLO Tri-Service Committee. Defined in Reference (g).

Milestone Decision Authority. Defined in DoDD 5000.01 (Reference (m)).

test and evaluate. An activity to determine the degree to which the implemented AT solution
meets program and DoD AT protection and performance requirements.

urgent operational need. Defined in Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3170.01H
(Reference (n)).




Change 3, 12/22/2020                                8                      GLOSSARY
