                            Department of Defense
                               DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 6400.04E
                                                                                    June 27, 2013
                                                          Incorporating Change 2, August 29, 2017

                                                                                         USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      DoD Veterinary Public and Animal Health Services

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 6400.4 (Reference (a)) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities for veterinary public and animal health services in accordance with the authority
in DoDD 5136.01 (Reference (b)).

   b. Designates the Secretary of the Army as the DoD Executive Agent (EA) for DoD
Veterinary Public and Animal Health Services in accordance with DoDD 5101.1 (Reference (c)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in
this directive as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

    a. Provide, in support of military planning, operations, and force health protection,
veterinary and public health services focused on:

       (1) Food protection to ensure wholesome subsistence.

       (2) Veterinary clinical medicine and diagnostic laboratory capabilities in support of DoD
working animals; military communities and families; and DoD Components’ research,
development, test and evaluation (RDT&E) and training.

    b. Provide Army veterinary service personnel (including veterinarians and veterinary food
safety officers) with relevant training and specialization to plan and deliver food protection,
                                                                  DoDD 6400.04E, June 27, 2013


animal health and welfare, veterinary public health, training, and RDT&E across the range of
military operations.

    c. Integrate installation veterinary public and animal health services with installation medical
services, including support from the installation commander and senior medical commander for
common services, supply, logistics, facilities, and communication.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
references for accuracy.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective June 27, 2013.




                                                  Ashton B. Carter
                                                  Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 2, 08/29/2017                             2
                                                             DoDD 6400.04E, June 27, 2013


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 6400.4, “DoD Veterinary Services Program,” August 22, 2003 (hereby
      cancelled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5136.01, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA)),”
      September 30, 2013
(c)   DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(d)   DoD Directive 5530.3, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987, as amended
(e)   DoD Instruction 6490.03, “Deployment Health,” August 11, 2006
(f)   DoD Directive 3235.02E, “DoD Combat Feeding Research and Engineering Program, DoD
      Combat Feeding Research and Engineering Board, and DoD Nutrition Committee,” May
      21, 2004
(g)   DoD Instruction 2000.12, “DoD Antiterrorism (AT) Program,” March 1, 2012, as amended
(h)   DoD Directive 6200.04, “Force Health Protection (FHP),” October 9, 2004
(i)   DoD Instruction 6200.03, “Public Health Emergency Management within the Department
      of Defense,” March 5, 2010, as amended
(j)   DoD Instruction 6055.17, “DoD Emergency Management (EM) Program,” February 13,
      2017
(k)   DoD Instruction O-2000.16, Volume 1, “DoD Antiterrorism (AT) Program
      Implementation: DoD AT Standards,” November 17, 2016, as amended
(l)   DoD Directive 5200.31E, “DoD Military Working Dog (MWD) Program,” August 10,
      2011
(m)   DoD Instruction 3216.01, “Use of Animals in DoD Programs,” September 13, 2010
(n)   DoD Instruction 1000.13, “Identification (ID) Cards for Members of the Uniformed
      Services, Their Dependents, and Other Eligible Individuals,” January 23, 2014
(o)   DoD Instruction 1015.15, “Establishment, Management, and Control of Nonappropriated
      Fund Instrumentalities and Financial Management of Supporting Resources,” October 31,
      2007, as amended
(p)   DoD Instruction 3000.05, “Stability Operations,” September 16, 2009, as amended
(q)   DoD Directive 3025.18, “Defense Support of Civil Authorities (DSCA),” December 29,
      2010, as amended
(r)   National Security Council, “National Strategy for Countering Biological Threats,”
      November 23, 2009
(s)   Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs Memorandum, “Implementation of Base
      Realignment and Closure Requirements Concerning the Armed Forces Institute of
      Pathology,” November 16, 2006
(t)   DoD Instruction 5154.30, “Armed Forces Medical Examiner System (AFMES)
      Operations,” December 29, 2015




Change 2,                                    3
08/29/2017
                                                                           ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DoDD 6400.04E, June 27, 2013


                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS. Under the authority,
direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs:

   a. Serves as the Principal Staff Assistant for DoD Veterinary Public and Animal Health
Services.

   b. Manages the activities of the DoD EA for DoD Veterinary Public and Animal Health
Services and monitors and evaluates the implementation of the program.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY. Under the authority, direction, and control of
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, the Director, Defense Health Agency:

   a. Issues guidance on veterinary public and animal health services in accordance with
Reference (b) and this directive.

   b. Supports the development and sustainment of mission essential information technology to
support DoD Veterinary Public and Animal Health Services and allocates Defense Health
Program funding, based on funding availability, for those systems.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

    a. Coordinate with the other Secretaries of the Military Departments at joint bases to
delineate Service responsibilities for installation food service sanitation and food protection
programs.

   b. Provide food and water risk assessments for deployed forces during initial entry,
exercises, and other short-term operations conducted outside the continental United States.

     c. Support installation veterinary services for common services, supply, logistics, facilities,
utilities, and communication.


4. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. In addition to the responsibilities in section 23 of this
enclosure, in his or her capacity as the DoD EA for DoD Veterinary Public and Animal Health
Services, the Secretary of the Army:



Change 2,                                         4
8/29/2017
                                                                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 6400.04E, June 27, 2013


    a. Ensures the uniform use of veterinary services throughout the DoD, in accordance with
this directive and DoDD 5530.3 (Reference (d)).

    b. Delegates authority to the Surgeon General, U.S. Army, to act on behalf of the DoD EA
for the DoD Veterinary Public and Animal Health Services to:

        (1) Develop, support, and evaluate food protection measures (food safety and food
defense) to ensure food ingredients and food products are safe, wholesome, meet quality
standards, and are free from unintentional or intentional contamination and adulteration, in
accordance with DoDI 6490.03, DoDD 3235.02E, DoDI 2000.12, DoDD 6200.04 (References
(e) through (h)), and during emergency response in accordance with DoDI 6200.03 (Reference
(i)).

        (2) In collaboration with the Military Services’ public health and preventive medicine
authorities, develop policy for:

           (a) Standardized installation food vulnerability assessments in accordance with
Reference (i), DoDI 6055.17 (Reference (j)), and Volume 1 of DoDI O-2000.16 (Reference (k)),
and provide veterinary support for completion of installation food vulnerability assessments on
Army and Navy installations.

           (b) Standardized food and water defense support and provide veterinary support for
completion of food and water defense at Army and Navy sponsored or supported off-installation
special events in accordance with Reference (k).

          (c) Standardized food and water risk assessments and provide veterinary support for
completion of food and water risk assessments for deployed forces during initial entry
deployment, exercises, and other short-term operations conducted outside the continental United
States.

        (3) Develop military sanitary standards for commercial food (including bottled water)
plants providing products to the DoD Components.

       (4) Maintain and publish approved lists of food suppliers used by all DoD Components.

       (5) Maintain laboratories or contract the capability for laboratory examinations (organic
or purchased) for wholesomeness and quality of food products and diagnosis of animal diseases.

       (6) Inspect food products and provide food protection programs at all food procurement,
operational ration assembly facilities, and subsistence and war reserve stocks storage facilities
under the control of the Defense Logistics Agency.

      (7) Inspect troop support food products on all installations under the control of the
Departments of the Army and Navy.



Change 2,                                       5
8/29/2017
                                                                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 6400.04E, June 27, 2013


        (8) Provide food inspection and food protection and, in collaboration with Army and
Navy Surgeons’ General preventive medicine or public health authorities, provide food service
sanitation programs at all Defense Commissary Agency and Exchange Service retail
convenience stores (e.g., shoppettes and mini-marts) associated with the Departments of the
Army and Navy.

        (9) In coordination with the Military Services’ public health and preventive medicine
authorities, develop and maintain the tri-Service Food Code used by all DoD Components.

       (10) Coordinate with the Secretaries of the Navy and Air Force at joint bases to delineate
Service responsibilities for installation food service sanitation and food protection programs.

      (11) Provide clinical and regulatory veterinary services, through appropriated and
nonappropriated funds, for:

          (a) Comprehensive care for DoD-owned animals supported by appropriated funds, in
accordance with DoDD 5200.31E and DoDI 3216.01 (References (l) and (m), respectively).

           (b) Comprehensive care for DoD-owned animals supported by nonappropriated
funds on a reimbursable basis as resources permit.

             (c) Comprehensive care for animals owned by individuals enrolled in the Defense
Enrollment and Eligibility Reporting System and who are authorized medical care in DoD
medical facilities in accordance with DoDI 1000.13 (Reference (n)), on a reimbursable basis, in
accordance with DoDI 1015.15 (Reference (o)). This care will consist of measures to prevent,
control, and treat animal diseases and conditions that present a public health, safety, or animal
health threat to a DoD installation or the surrounding community, and to maintain veterinary
clinical skills proficiency.

           (d) Comprehensive care for non-DoD owned government animals in accordance with
interagency agreements on a reimbursable basis.

        (12) Operate facilities and establish equipment standards for and monitor standard of
care at installation veterinary facilities.

      (13) Operate the Veterinary Services Central Funds Supplemental Mission
Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentality in accordance with Reference (o).

        (14) Provide veterinary public health guidance, consultation, and clinical support
regarding zoonotic diseases, including veterinarian participation in installation and command
rabies advisory teams or boards, and in conducting the animal rabies control program.

       (15) Advocate for and provide consultation for animal welfare on DoD installations.




Change 2,                                       6
8/29/2017
                                                                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 6400.04E, June 27, 2013


      (16) Provide advocacy, veterinary consultation, and support for DoD Human-Animal
Bond Programs, DoD animal-assisted activity/therapy programs, and service/assistance animals
owned by authorized beneficiaries described in paragraph 3b(11)(c) of this enclosure.

        (17) Provide veterinary coordination, manning, and support to plan and conduct
agricultural, veterinary public health, and animal health activities across the range of military
operations, to include:

          (a) Support of DoD Stability Operations and Medical Stability Operations in
accordance with DoDI 3000.05 (Reference (p)).

          (b) Defense Support to Civil Authorities in accordance with DoDD 3025.18
(Reference (q)).

           (c) Global Health strategic goals, to include veterinary and public health support of
the National Strategy for Countering Biological Threats (Reference (r)).

        (18) Train and equip Army veterinary service personnel, including veterinarians and
veterinary food safety officers with relevant specialty training, to enable food protection, animal
health and welfare, veterinary public health, and, when required by the DoD Components, for
RDT&E and training. Select and assign veterinarians to the DoD veterinary pathology residency
program in accordance with Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs Memorandum
(Reference (s)) and DoDI 5154.30 (Reference (t)).

       (19) Identify requirements for veterinary services information systems.


5. SECRETARY OF THE NAVY. In addition to the responsibilities in section 23 of this
enclosure, the Secretary of the Navy:

    a. Establishes and provides food service sanitation programs for the Department of the Navy.
Collaborates on all food service sanitation programs with Army veterinary services at Defense
Commissary Agency and Exchange Service retail convenience stores in accordance with
paragraph 3b(8) of this enclosure.

    b. In collaboration with Army veterinary services, supports installation food vulnerability
assessment support to naval installation commanders.

   c. In collaboration with Army veterinary services, supports food and water defense at Navy
sponsored or supported off-installation special events.


6. SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. In addition to the responsibilities in section 23 of this
enclosure, the Secretary of the Air Force:



Change 2,                                         7
8/29/2017
                                                                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 6400.04E, June 27, 2013


   a. Establishes and provides food inspection, food protection, and food service sanitation
programs on Air Force installations.

   b. Develops, when required, locally approved lists of food suppliers from which food
products are procured only for individual Air Force installations.

   c. Supports installation food vulnerability assessments on Air Force installations.

   d. Supports food and water defense at Air Force sponsored or supported off-installation
special events.




Change 2,                                       8
8/29/2017
                                                                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 6400.04E, June 27, 2013


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

 DoDD         DoD Directive
 DoDI         DoD Instruction


 EA           Executive Agent


 RDT&E        research, development, test and evaluation


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

food and water defense. A program normally conducted jointly by veterinary and public health
personnel to identify and mitigate food safety hazards for special events held off installation.

food and water risk assessment. A program conducted under specific circumstances by
veterinary or public health personnel to assess food operations to identify and mitigate risk from
intentional and unintentional contamination. Circumstances under which an assessment is
conducted include short term deployments, for deployed forces during initial entry deployment,
and exercises and other short-term operations conducted outside the United States or its
territories.

food defense. Protection measures necessary to identify and mitigate the threat of intentional
contamination of food.

food emergency response. A rapid food protection response to unexpected, imminent hazards,
natural or manmade, that affect DoD feeding systems or affect those feeding systems with which
DoD has written support agreements for response.

food inspection. The hands-on sensory and, when indicated, laboratory evaluation of food and
food products for wholesomeness, condition, tampering, and quality. Food inspection
encompasses source, delivery, storage, processing, sale and issue. It excludes food-service meal
preparation.

food protection. Overarching term that includes both food safety and food defense.

food safety. Protection measures necessary to identify, mitigate, or eliminate the risk from
unintentional contamination.



Change 2,                                         9
08/29/2017
                                                                                     GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDD 6400.04E, June 27, 2013


food service sanitation inspections. The application of food safety principles to ensure safe food
handling, preparation, and storage of prepared food in establishments that serve meals to DoD
patrons.

installation food vulnerability assessment. A program conducted by DoD veterinary or Military
Services’ public health personnel to determine the vulnerability of an installation’s food and food
service operations to natural or intentional contamination or destruction, including terrorist
attacks. Assessments identify areas of improvement to withstand, mitigate, and deter such
hazards. They are conducted on installations or in facilities associated with a DoD installation.

retail convenience stores. Small retail facilities under the control of DoD where the primary
items for sale are packaged foods purchased for consumption outside the facility. Convenience
stores may include shoppettes, mini-marts, or retail outlets. They may be equipped for minimal
food processing operations.

veterinary services. The DoD veterinary services capability encompasses animal health and
welfare and veterinary public health. Veterinary public health focuses on the animal health
interface with human health and environmental health and is an essential part of public health.
More specifically, veterinary services consist of the practice of veterinary medicine and surgery,
including diagnosis and treatment of sick or injured animals; animal health and zoonotic disease
surveillance, epidemiology, control and prevention of zoonosis; food protection; management of
health aspects of laboratory animal facilities and diagnostic laboratories; biomedical research;
health education and extension; production and control of biological products and medical
devices; management of domestic and wild animal populations; protection of drinking water and
the environment; and shared management of public health emergencies.




Change 2,                                       10
08/29/2017
                                                                                     GLOSSARY
