                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                               NUMBER 1125.03
                                                                               December 22, 2009
                                        Incorporating Change 1, Effective December 1, 2017

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Vending Facility Program for the Blind on DoD-Controlled Federal Property

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 1125.3 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction in
accordance with the authority in DoDD 5124.02 (Reference (b)).

   b. Assigns responsibilities in compliance with section 107 et seq. of title 20, United States
Code and chapter 3, part 395 of title 34, Code of Federal Regulations (References (c) and (d)),
and establishes the following policies within the Department of Defense:

         (1) Uniform policies for application of priority accorded the blind to operate vending
facilities;

       (2) Requirements for satisfactory vending facility sites on DoD-controlled property; and

       (3) Vending machine income-sharing requirements on DoD-controlled property.

    c. Prescribes requirements and operating procedures for the vending facility program for the
blind on DoD-controlled Federal property.

   d. Does NOT apply to full food services, mess attendant services, or services supporting the
operation of a military dining facility.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
                                                                DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”).

   b. Vending facility sites on DoD-controlled property.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that a DoD Component having accountability for real property
shall extend priority on such property to the blind when implementing Reference (c).

   a. The blind shall be given priority in the establishment and operation of vending facilities.

   b. The blind shall be given priority in the award of contracts to operate cafeterias.

    c. In conjunction with acquisition or substantial alteration or renovation of a building,
satisfactory sites shall be provided for operation of blind vending facilities.

  d. Specified income from vending machines operated on DoD-controlled property by a DoD
Component either directly or by contract shall be given to State licensing agencies.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. DoD Component requirements and operating procedures are described in
Enclosure 3.


7. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the
DoD Components shall forward to the Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for
Personnel and Readiness (PDUSD(P&R)) the total number of applications for vending facility
locations received from State licensing agencies; the number accepted; the number denied; the
number still pending; the total amount of vending machine income collected (excluding income
exempt from the income sharing requirements by paragraph 6.c. of Enclosure 3 of this
Instruction); and the amount of such vending machine income disbursed to State licensing
agencies in each State. These reporting requirements have been assigned Report Control Symbol
DD-P&R(A)2210, according to Volume 1 of DoD Manual 8910.01(Reference (e)).


8. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 1, 12/01/2017
                                                 2
                                                        DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009



9. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance is administrative and updates
references for accuracy.


10. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective December 22, 2009.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. DoD Component Requirements and Operating Guidance
   Glossary




  Change 1, 12/01/2017                     3
                                                         DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


                                     ENCLOSURE 1

                                     REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 1125.3, “Vending Facility Program for the Blind on Federal Property,”
    April 7, 1978 (hereby canceled)
(b) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c) Section 107 of title 20, United States Code
(d) Chapter 3, part 395 of title 34, Code of Federal Regulations
(e) DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
    DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 20, 2014, as amended
(f) DoD Instruction 4165.70, “Real Property Management,” April 6, 2005




  Change 1, 12/01/2017                      4                            ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. PDUSD(P&R). The PDUSD(P&R), under the authority, direction, and control of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall establish policies and procedures and
monitor the Vending Facility Program.


2. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L) shall assign responsibilities and establish policy
and procedures for appropriated fund contracts.


3. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components, in monitoring
their respective programs, shall:

    a. Approve or disapprove State licensing agency applications for permits and the provision
of satisfactory sites.

    b. Issue policies and procedures to designate and establish responsibilities of the on-site
official.

  c. Suspend or terminate a permit to operate a vending facility after consulting with the
PDUSD(P&R) where circumstances warrant.

   e. Ensure appropriate real property outgrants are accomplished in accordance with DoDI
4165.70 (Reference (f)) and consistent with References (c) and (d).


4. ON-SITE OFFICIAL. The on-site official shall be the point of contact with State licensing
agencies and shall:

   a. Consult with State licensing agencies on articles and services to be provided.

    b. Establish appropriate limitations on the location or operation of a vending facility upon
finding that the granting of a priority under References (c) and (d) would adversely affect the
interests of the United States. The On-Site Official shall justify this limitation in writing through
the Head of the DoD Component concerned and the PDUSD(P&R) to the Secretary of Education
for determination of whether the limitation is warranted.

   c. Notify State licensing agencies of acquisition or substantial alteration or renovation of
property.




 Change 1, 12/01/2017                             5                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


    d. Negotiate with State licensing agencies on other matters and adhere to guidance provided
in Enclosure 3 of this Instruction.




  Change 1, 12/01/2017                         6                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


                                          ENCLOSURE 3

           DoD COMPONENT REQUIREMENTS AND OPERATING GUIDANCE


1. The DoD Components in control of the maintenance, operation, and protection of Federal
property shall take necessary action to ensure the requirements set forth in this enclosure are
implemented for these properties.

2. The blind have a priority to operate vending facilities on DoD property, whenever feasible, in
light of appropriate space and potential patronage. Implementation of this priority is not required
when:

    a. The number of people using the property is or will be insufficient to support a vending
facility; or

    b. The Secretary of Education determines that the limitation on the placement or operation of
a vending facility is warranted pursuant to paragraph 4.b. of Enclosure 2 of this Instruction,
which is binding on the DoD Component. Notice of the Secretary of Education’s determination
will be published in the Federal Register.

3. Applications for permits by the State licensing agency to operate vending facilities (except
cafeterias) on DoD-controlled property must be submitted in writing to the Head of the DoD
Component concerned through the on-site official. When an application is not approved, the
Head of the DoD Component concerned shall advise the State licensing agency in writing and
shall indicate the reasons for the disapproval. Permits shall describe the location of the vending
facility and shall be subject to the following requirements:

   a. The permit shall be issued in the name of the State licensing agency.

    b. The permit shall be issued for an indefinite period of time subject to suspension or
termination upon failure to comply with agreed-upon terms. It shall be subject to termination by
either party on 60 days written notice to the other party, in cases of:

       (1) Inactivation of the installation or activity.

       (2) Loss of use of a building or other facility housing the vending facility.

       (3) Change in the DoD Component’s requirements for service.

       (4) Inability of the State licensing agency to continue to operate the vending facility.

   c. The permit shall provide that:

       (1) No charge shall be made by the DoD Component to the State licensing agency for
normal repair and maintenance of the building, cleaning areas adjacent to the designated vending

Change 1, 12/01/2017                            7
                                                                                   ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


facility boundaries, or trash removal from a designated collection point (not to include any
hazardous waste).

         (2) The State licensing agency shall be responsible for cleaning and maintaining the
vending facility appearance and its security within the designated boundaries of such facility and
for all costs of every kind in conjunction with vending facility equipment, merchandise, and
other products to be sold, except as provided in subparagraph 3.c.(5) of this enclosure. Neither
party shall be responsible for loss or damage to the other’s property, unless caused by its acts or
omissions. The State licensing agency shall also be responsible for the acts or omissions of the
blind vendor, the vendor’s employees, or agents.

        (3) Articles sold at such vending facilities may consist of newspapers, periodicals,
publications, confections, tobacco products, foods, beverages, chances for any lottery authorized
by State law and conducted by an agency of a State within such State, and other articles or
services traditionally found in blind-operated vending facilities operated under Reference (c), as
determined by the State licensing agency, in consultation with the on-site official, to be suitable
for a particular location. Articles and services may be automatically or manually dispensed.

        (4) Vending facilities shall be operated in compliance with applicable Federal, State,
interstate, and local laws and regulations, including those concerning health and sanitation, the
environment, and building codes.

         (5) Installation, modification, relocation, removal, and renovation of vending facilities
shall be subject to the prior approval of the on-site official and the State licensing agency. The
initiating party shall pay the costs of installation, modification, removal, relocation, or
renovation. In any case of suspension or termination of a permit to operate a vending facility on
the basis of noncompliance by either party, the costs of removal from the building shall be borne
by the non-complying party.

    d. The permit shall also contain appropriate provisions for reimbursement or direct payment
for support services such as utilities and telephone service.

4. In the event the blind licensee fails to provide satisfactory service or otherwise fails to comply
with the requirements of the permit issued to the State licensing agency, the on-site official shall,
after coordinating with the Head of the DoD Component, notify the State licensing agency of this
deficiency in writing and request corrective action within a specified reasonable time. The
notice shall indicate that failure to correct the deficiency shall result in temporary suspension or
termination of the permit, as appropriate. Suspension or termination action shall be taken by the
Head of the DoD Component concerned after consultation with the PDUSD(P&R).

5. Any DoD Component-acquired (purchased, rented, leased, or constructed), substantially
altered, or renovated building is required to have one or more satisfactory sites for a blind-
operated vending facility, except as provided in paragraph 5.a. of this enclosure.




                                                 8
      Change 1, 12/01/2017                                                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


    a. A determination that a building contains a satisfactory site or sites is presumed if the State
licensing agency and the on-site official consult and agree that the site or sites provided are
satisfactory.

         (1) The Heads of the DoD Components shall notify the appropriate State-licensing
agency by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, of buildings to be acquired or
substantially altered or renovated. (See the U.S. Department of Education Web Site, Office of
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services at www.ed.gov for appropriate agencies.) This
notification shall be provided at least 60 days in advance of the intended acquisition date or the
initiation of actual construction, alteration, or renovation. As a practical matter, the State
licensing agency should be contacted early in the planning or design stage of a project. This
notification shall:

             (a) State that a satisfactory site(s) for the location and operation of a blind vending
facility is (are) included in the plans for the building.

           (b) Include a copy of a single line drawing indicating the proposed location of such
site(s).

           (c) Advise the State licensing agency that, subject to the approval of the DoD
Component, it shall be offered the opportunity to select the location and type of vending facility
to be operated by a blind vendor prior to completion of the final space layout of the building.

        (2) Advise that the State licensing agency must respond within 30 days to the DoD
Component, acknowledging receipt of the correspondence from the DoD Component and
indicating whether it is interested in establishing a vending facility and, if interested, signifying
its agreement or alternate selection of a location and its selection of type of vending facility. A
copy of the written notice to the State licensing agency and the State licensing agency’s
response, if any, shall be provided to the Secretary of Education.

        (3) If the State licensing agency’s response to the DoD Component indicates that it does
not desire to establish and operate a vending facility and sets forth any specific basis other than
the insufficiency of persons to support a vending facility, or if the State licensing agency does
not respond within 30 days, then a site meeting the anticipated needs of the DoD Component
shall be incorporated. Each such site shall have a minimum of 250 square feet for sale of items
and for storage of articles necessary for the operation of a vending facility.

        (4) If the State licensing agency indicates that the number of persons using the property
is or will be insufficient to support a vending facility, then a satisfactory site to be operated under
the auspices of the State licensing agency shall not be incorporated. The on-site official shall,
through the Head of the DoD Component, notify the Secretary of Education of the State
licensing agency’s response.

    b. The requirement to provide a satisfactory site shall not apply:




                                                   9
Change 1, 12/01/2017                                                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


      (1) When fewer than 100 Federal employees are located in the building during normal
working hours; or

       (2) When the building contains fewer than 15,000 square feet to be used for Federal
Government purposes and the Federal Government space is used to provide services to the
general public.

        (3) The provisions of subparagraphs 5.b.(1) and 5.b.(2) of this enclosure do not preclude
arrangements under which blind vending facilities may be established in buildings of a size or
with an employee population less than that specified. For example, if a building is to be
constructed that will contain only 30 Federal employees, upon agreement of the on-site official
and the State licensing agency, the DoD Component may decide to provide a satisfactory site for
a blind vending facility.

    c. When a DoD Component is leasing all or part of a privately-owned building in which the
lessor or any of its tenants have an existing restaurant or other food facility in a part of the
building not covered by the lease, and operation of a vending facility would be in substantial
direct competition with such restaurant or other food operation, the requirement to provide a
satisfactory site does not apply.

6. Vending machine income generated by the Department of Defense shall be shared
with State licensing agencies as prescribed in paragraph 6.a. of this enclosure. The on-site
official is responsible for collecting and accounting for such vending machine income (as
defined in Enclosure 2 of this Instruction) and for ensuring compliance with the requirements of
paragraphs 6.a. through 6.d. of this enclosure.

   a. The vending machine income-sharing requirements are as follows:

        (1) One hundred percent of the vending machine income from vending machines in
direct competition with blind-operated vending facilities shall be provided to the State licensing
agency.

       (2) Fifty percent of the vending machine income from vending machines not in direct
competition with blind-operated vending facilities shall be provided to the State licensing
agency.

         (3) Not withstanding paragraph 6.a.(2) of this enclosure, 30 percent of the vending
machine income from vending machines not in direct competition with blind-operated vending
facilities, and located where at least 50 percent of the total hours worked on the premises occurs
during other than normal working hours (as defined in Enclosure 2 of this Instruction), shall be
provided to the State licensing agency.

    b. The determination of whether a vending machine is in direct competition with the blind-
operated vending facility is the responsibility of the on-site official subject to the concurrence of
the State licensing agency.



                                                 10
Change 1, 12/01/2017                                                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


    c. These vending machine income-sharing requirements do not apply to:

        (1) Income from vending machines operated by or for the military exchanges or ships’
store systems; or

       (2) Income from vending machines, not in direct competition with a blind-operated
vending facility, at any individual location, installation, or facility where the total of the vending
machine income from all such machines at such location, installation, or facility does not exceed
$3,000 annually.

   d. The payment to State licensing agencies under these income-sharing requirements must be
made quarterly on a fiscal-year basis.

7. Pursuant to section 395.37 of Reference (d), whenever any State licensing agency for the
blind determines that any DoD activity is failing to comply with the provisions of Reference (c)
and all informal attempts to resolve the issues have been unsuccessful, the State licensing agency
may file a complaint with the Secretary of Education.




                                                  11
Change 1, 12/01/2017                                                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


                                           GLOSSARY

                                          DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

blind licensee. A blind person licensed by the State licensing agency to operate a vending
facility on DoD-controlled property.

cafeteria. A food dispensing facility capable of providing a broad variety of prepared foods and
beverages (including hot meals) primarily through the use of a line where the customer serves
himself or herself from displayed selections. A cafeteria may be fully automatic, or some limited
waiter or waitress service may be available and provided within a cafeteria, and table or booth
seating facilities are always provided. The DoD Component food dispensing facilities that
conduct cafeteria-type operations during part of their normal operating day and full table-service
operations during the remainder of their normal operating day are not “cafeterias” if they engage
primarily in full table-service operations.

direct competition. The presence and operation of a DoD Component vending machine or a
vending facility on the same DoD-controlled property as a vending facility operated by a blind
vendor. Vending machines or vending facilities operated in areas serving employees, the
majority of whom normally do not have access (in terms of uninterrupted ease of approach and
the amount of time required to patronize the vending facility) to the vending facility operated by
a blind vendor, shall not be considered to be in direct competition with the vending facility
operated by a blind vendor.

DoD-controlled property. Federal property that is owned, leased, or occupied by the Department
of Defense.

Federal employees. Civilian-appropriated fund and nonappropriated fund employees of the
United States.

Federal property. Any building, land, or other real property owned, leased, or occupied by the
Department of Defense in the United States.

individual location, installation, or facility. A single building or a self-contained group of
buildings. A self-contained group of buildings refers to two or more buildings that must be
located in close proximity to each other and between which a majority of the Federal employees
working in such buildings regularly move from one building to another in the normal course of
their official business during a normal working day.

license. A written instrument issued by a State licensing agency to a blind person, authorizing
that person to operate a vending facility on DoD-controlled property.

military dining facility. A facility owned, operated, or leased and wholly controlled by the
Department of Defense and used to provide dining services to members of the Armed Forces,



Change 1, 12/01/2017                       12                                GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009


including a cafeteria, military mess hall, military troop dining facility, or any similar dining
facility operated for the purpose of providing meals to members of the Armed Forces.

normal working hours. An 8-hour work period between the approximate hours of 0800 and
1800, Monday through Friday.

on-site official. The individual in command of an installation or separate facility or location.
For the Pentagon Reservation only, the Washington Headquarters Services Director of the
Defense Facilities Directorate is designated as the on-site official.

permit. The official approval given a State licensing agency by a department, agency, or
instrumentality responsible for DoD-controlled property whereby a State licensing agency is
authorized to establish a vending facility.

satisfactory site. An area fully accessible to vending facility patrons and having sufficient
electrical, plumbing, heating, and ventilation outlets for the location and operation of a vending
facility in compliance with applicable health laws and building requirements. A satisfactory site
shall have a minimum of 250 square feet available for sale of items and for storage of articles
necessary for the operation of a vending facility.

State. A State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, a territory, or
possession of the United States.

State licensing agency. The State agency designated by the Secretary of Education, to issue
licenses to blind persons for the operation of vending facilities on Federal and other property.

substantial alteration or renovation. A permanent material change in the floor area of a building
that would render it appropriate for the location and operation of a vending facility by a blind
vendor.

United States. The several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
and the territories and possessions of the United States.

vending facility. Automatic vending machines, cafeterias, snack bars, cart service, shelters,
counters, and such other appropriate auxiliary equipment that may be operated by blind licensees
and that are necessary for the sale of newspapers, periodicals, confections, tobacco products,
foods, beverages, and other articles and services to be dispensed automatically or manually and
that are prepared on or off the premises according to applicable health laws. Also includes
facilities providing the vending or exchange of chances for any lottery authorized by State law
and conducted by an agency of a State within such State.

vending machine. For the purposes of assigning vending machine income, a coin- or currency-
operated machine that dispenses articles or services, except that those machines operated by the
United States Postal Service for the sale of postage stamps or other postal products and services,
machines providing services of a recreational nature, and telephones shall not be considered to
be vending machines.



Change 1, 12/01/2017                       13                                   GLOSSARY
                                                             DoDI 1125.03, December 22, 2009



vending machine income

    DoD Component receipts from the DoD Component vending machine operations on DoD-
controlled property, where the machines are operated by any DoD Component activity, less costs
incurred; or

   Commissions received by any DoD Component activity from a commercial vending firm that
provides vending machines on DoD-controlled property.

    “Costs incurred” include costs of goods, including reasonable service and maintenance costs
in accordance with customary business practices of commercial vending concerns, repair,
cleaning, depreciation, supervisory and administrative personnel, normal accounting, and
accounting for income-sharing.

vendor. A blind licensee who is operating a vending facility on DoD-controlled property.




Change 1, 12/01/2017                     14                                GLOSSARY
