                               Department of Defense

                                  INSTRUCTION
                                                                               NUMBER 2000.11
                                                                                      May 13, 2010
                                                              Incorporating Change 1, May 23, 2017

                                                                                              USD(P)

SUBJECT:       Procedures for Handling Requests for Asylum and Temporary Refuge

References: (a) DoD Directive 2000.11, subject as above, March 3, 1972 (hereby cancelled)
            (b) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),”
                December 8, 1999
            (c) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,”
                November 30, 2006
            (d) Sections 227-229, “Department of State Foreign Affairs Manual,” Volume 2,
                current edition
            (e) DoD Instruction 5240.10, “Counterintelligence (CI) in the Combatant
                Commands and Other DoD Components,” October 5, 2011, as amended


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction reissues Reference (a) as a DoD Instruction in accordance with
the authority in References (b) and (c) to establish policy and assign responsibilities for DoD
handling of requests for asylum and temporary refuge in accordance with Reference (d).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

    a. asylum. Protection granted by the U.S. Government within the United States to a foreign
national who, due to persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on account of his or her
race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion, is unable
or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of his or her country of nationality (or, if
stateless, of last habitual residence).
                                                                       DoDI 2000.11, May 13, 2010


    b. temporary refuge. Protection afforded for humanitarian reasons to a foreign national in a
DoD shore installation, facility, or military vessel within the territorial jurisdiction of a foreign
nation or in international waters, under conditions of urgency in order to secure the life or safety
of that person against imminent danger, such as pursuit by a mob.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy to handle requests from foreign nationals for asylum or temporary
refuge as follows:

    a. If the foreign national requesting asylum is physically present in the territory of the United
States, which includes the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
the U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands, the application for asylum will be adjudicated by the U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services, Department of Homeland Security, or if the applicant is in removal
proceedings, by an Immigration Judge of the Executive Office for Immigration Review,
Department of Justice.

   b. In all other areas (including territorial seas and international waters):

       (1) Temporary Refuge

            (a) The senior official present at the DoD Component shore installation or facility or
on board any military vessel may grant temporary refuge to a foreign national, upon his or her
request. When deciding which measures may be prudently taken to provide temporary refuge,
the safety of U.S. personnel and security of the unit must be taken into consideration.

           (b) Temporary refuge will be terminated only when directed by the Head of the
affected DoD Component, or higher authority, in coordination with relevant U.S. entities.

           (c) Persons whose temporary refuge is terminated will be released to the protection
of the authorities designated in the message authorizing release.

       (2) Asylum

             (a) Although asylum, according to paragraph 3.a., by definition can only be sought
and granted within U.S. territory, foreign nationals may in fact request “asylum” or otherwise
seek protection in other areas, including territorial seas and international waters; the procedures
in this Instruction have been developed to address such requests. Foreign nationals (including
third country nationals) seeking asylum should be referred, as applicable, to the local
representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees or, if outside the
individual’s country of nationality or if the individual fears harm from host country officials, to
the appropriate officials in the host country, foreign territory, or foreign possession, if any, for
assistance in being recognized as a refugee or submitting a request for asylum under that
country’s domestic laws and procedures.




Change 1, 05/23/2017                              2
                                                                       DoDI 2000.11, May 13, 2010


           (b) Requests for asylum received by Defense Attaché personnel and other military
personnel serving under the direction of a Chief of Diplomatic Mission will be governed by the
appropriate instructions applicable to the diplomatic mission.

          (c) DoD personnel shall neither directly nor indirectly invite persons to seek asylum
or temporary refuge.

            (d) If it is clear from the facts and circumstances that the requestor is in fact seeking
temporary refuge but has improperly used the word “asylum,” the request should be treated as a
request for temporary refuge and the requestor so informed.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective May 13, 2010.




Enclosure
   Responsibilities




Change 1, 05/23/2017                              3
                                                                    DoDI 2000.11, May 13, 2010


                                             ENCLOSURE

                                         RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall oversee
implementation of this Instruction.


2. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

   a. Designate an agent to exercise staff supervision of the implementation of this Instruction
with respect to cases arising within their respective Components.

   b. Establish a point of contact and appropriate channels and procedures for the expeditious
processing and disposition of requests for asylum or temporary refuge that are made to
organizational elements under their jurisdiction.

    c. Coordinate with the Heads of the Department of State, the Department of Homeland
Security (U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services), and the Department of Justice to ensure
the proper redirection of individual cases arising within their areas of jurisdiction.

   d. Develop and implement guidance consistent with the provisions of this Instruction as
appropriate.

    e. Ensure the lead counterintelligence agency serving a DoD Component Head screens
person(s) requesting asylum and seeking temporary refuge for intelligence, counterintelligence,
and international terrorist information, and conducts local agency checks in accordance with
DoD Instruction 5240.10 (Reference (e)). Information contained in or pertaining to asylum
applications is protected against disclosure to third parties.


3. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. In addition to the responsibilities in section 2 of this
enclosure, the Secretary of the Army shall develop guidance for use by personnel of the Military
Departments in handling requests for asylum and temporary refuge made by foreign nationals
within areas under U.S. exclusive jurisdiction or U.S. administration.


4. COMMANDERS OF THE GEOGRAPHIC COMBATANT COMMANDS. In addition to
the responsibilities in section 2 of this enclosure, the Commanders of the geographic Combatant
Commands shall:

   a. Develop and coordinate guidance for use by personnel of the DoD Components within
each Combatant Commander’s area of responsibility on handling requests for temporary refuge
made by foreign nationals within foreign areas under U.S. jurisdiction or U.S. military control.




Change 1, 05/23/2017                            4                          ENCLOSURE
                                                                     DoDI 2000.11, May 13, 2010


    b. Supervise and monitor compliance with this Instruction with respect to cases arising in
foreign countries.

   c. Designate, as appropriate, a coordinating authority, with respect to policies, procedures,
and guidance applicable in foreign countries.

    d. Coordinate procedures and the special guidance applicable in particular foreign countries,
or because of exceptional circumstances.




Change 1, 05/23/2017                            5                           ENCLOSURE
