                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 1215.15
                                                                                   July 1, 2014
                                             Incorporating Change 1, Effective October 13, 2016

                                                                                      USD(P&R)
SUBJECT: Military Reserve Exchange Program (MREP)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 1215.15 (Reference (a)) as a
DoD instruction in accordance with authority in DoDD 5124.02 (Reference (b)) and the guidance
in DoDD 5530.3 (Reference (c)) to:

  a. Establish policy and assign responsibilities for management and administration of an
MREP between the DoD and foreign ministries of defense.

   b. Change the MREP from a formerly Reserve officer-exclusive program, known as the
Reserve Officers Foreign Exchange Program, to an all-inclusive program for Reserve
Component officers, warrant officers, and enlisted Service members.


2. APPLICABILITY

    a. This instruction applies to the OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this
instruction as the “DoD Components”).

    b. Does not apply to personnel foreign exchange programs between Active Components of
the U.S. Armed Forces and foreign military services.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The DoD has an MREP for the exchange of U.S. Reservists of the Military Departments
and Reservists of allied governments whenever such 2- to 4-week training periods will enhance
the participants’ ability to perform assigned mobilization duties.
                                                                        DoDI 1215.15, July 1, 2014

    b. The Reserve Components of the Military Departments participate in specific exchanges
with allied governments when mobilization requirements allow for the availability of personnel
to participate.

    c. MREP representatives are qualified, experienced, and trained in their military specialties
as determined by the respective Military Departments.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.

7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.

8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective July 1, 2014.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 1, 10/13/2016                             2
                                                                    DoDI 1215.15, July 1, 2014

                                        ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 1215.15, “Reserve Officers Foreign Exchange Program,” January 29, 2004
      (hereby cancelled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c)   DoD Directive 5530.3, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987, as amended
(d)   Section 168 (note) of Title 10, United States Code
(e)   DoD Directive 4500.54E, “DoD Foreign Clearance Program (FCP),” December 28, 2009
(f)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Federal Minister of Defense of the Federal
      Republic of Germany and the Secretary of Defense of the United States of America
      concerning the Exchange of Reserve Officers, August 2, 1985
(g)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Defence of the United Kingdom of
      Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Department of Defense of the United States of
      America concerning the Exchange of Reserve Officers, September 11, 1989
(h)   Memorandum of Agreement between the Department of Defense of the United States of
      America and the Ministry of Defence of the Kingdom of Denmark Regarding the Military
      Reserve Exchange Program, December 11, 2012
(i)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Department of Defense of the United States of
      America and the Department of National Defence of Canada regarding the Reserve Foreign
      Training Program, February 4, 2010
(j)   Section 112b of Title 1, United States Code




Change 1, 10/13/2016                           3                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                       DoDI 1215.15, July 1, 2014

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
(ASD(M&RA)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness, the ASD(M&RA):

    a. Generates all international memorandums of understanding (MOUs) and memorandums
of agreement (MOAs) relating to an MREP between the DoD and foreign ministries of defense
for the assignment of Reserve exchange personnel pursuant to section 168 (note) of Title 10,
United States Code (Reference (d)). This includes all aspects of coordination with appropriate
DoD offices (particularly with the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International
Security Affairs; the Director, International Security Programs, Defense Technology Security
Administration; the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Security Cooperation; and the
Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense) and all aspects of negotiating and
concluding MOA and MOUs with foreign ministries of defense as outlined in Reference (c).

   b. Negotiates with foreign ministries of defense regarding the specific positions and the
number, qualifications, and grade of Reserve Component members to participate in each
exchange.

    c. Conducts any further coordination with foreign ministries of defense necessary to ensure
the overall success of each exchange.

   d. Exercises coordination and oversight responsibility within the DoD for execution of the
exchanges under the MREP.

   e. Designates the MREP Coordinator.

    f. Ensures that exchanges under the MREP are implemented in agreement with applicable
international treaties.


2. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

    a. Provide advice to the ASD(M&RA)on the management, administration, and effectiveness
of the MREP.

   b. Establish specific criteria by which Reserve Component members are to be considered for
exchanges under the MREP in response to requirements designated by the ASD(M&RA).

   c. Screen and select qualified Reserve Component members using DD Form 3006, “Military
Reserve Exchange Program Officer/Non-Commissioned Officer Application,” to fill specific
exchange positions desired by the Military Department concerned, and submit the names of those


Change 1, 10/13/2016                             4                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 1215.15, July 1, 2014


Reserve Component members selected and the corresponding position desired to the
ASD(M&RA)for final coordination.

   d. Implement the MREP in accordance with this instruction and consistent with:

       (1) DoDD 4500.54E (Reference (e)).

       (2) The MOU between the Federal Minister of Defense of the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Secretary of Defense of the United States of America concerning the Exchange
of Reserve Officers (Reference (f)).

       (3) MOU between the Ministry of Defence of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the DoD of the United States of America concerning the Exchange of
Reserve Officers (Reference (g)).

       (4) The MOA between the DoD of the United States of America and the Ministry of
Defence of the Kingdom of Denmark Regarding the Military Reserve Exchange Program
(Reference (h)).

       (5) The MOU between the Department of Defense of the United States of America and
the Department of National Defence of Canada regarding the Reserve Foreign Training
Program(Reference (i)).

   e. Program and budget for all administrative and operational requirements for
implementation of each MOA and MOU within their respective Military Departments.

   f. Designate a Service member or civilian employee to serve as the MREP Administrator.




Change 1, 10/13/2016                          5                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDI 1215.15, July 1, 2014

                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                                        PROCEDURES


1. ASD(M&RA)

   a. Receives requests from foreign countries stating their desire to participate in the MREP.

   b. Provides a response to the requesting nation accepting or declining participation.

       (1) If accepting participation, the MREP Coordinator submits a request for authority to
negotiate and conclude an MOA or MOU to the Director, International Security Programs,
Defense Technology Security Administration for coordination. After coordination, approval will
be granted in accordance with Reference (c).

        (2) On receiving approval to negotiate and conclude an MOA or MOU, the MOA or
MOU is coordinated with the requesting foreign ministry of defense in coordination with the
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy the Director, International Security
Programs, Defense Technology Security Administration, and the Office of the General Counsel
of the Department of Defense.

    c. Designates a representative from the DoD to conclude the MOA or MOU with the
designated representative from a foreign ministry of defense.

    d. Pursuant to section 112b of Title 1, United States Code (also known as “the Case Act,”
Reference (j)), ensures that MOAs and MOUs that have been concluded are provided to the
Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense and ensures that any MOA that has
entered into force is transmitted to the U.S. Department of State within 20 days of signature.

   e. Coordinates the level of participation by the Reserve Components of the Military
Departments with Service MREP Administrators.

   f. Ensures that the MREP Coordinator exercises oversight responsibility within the DoD for
execution of the exchanges under the MREP.

    g. Ensures that exchanges under the MREP are implemented in accordance with applicable
international agreements and arrangements.


2. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments appoint an MREP Administrator to exercise administrative control over the
program within that Department. They identify names and contact information of Department
MREP Administrators to the Office of the ASD(M&RA) MREP Coordinator.




Change 1, 10/13/2016                            6                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 1215.15, July 1, 2014


3. MILITARY DEPARTMENT MREP ADMINISTRATOR. The Military Department MREP
Administrator is to:

   a. Coordinate with the Office of the ASD(M&RA) MREP Coordinator on the availability
and number of personnel to participate in the program.

    b. Coordinate with the respective Service Component command to support the execution of
the exchanges.

   c. Fund and provide program exchange requirements to support participation in the MREP.

   d. Execute the MREP as outlined in the appropriate MOA or MOU and in agreement with
applicable international agreements or arrangements.

    e. Participate in after-action reviews and provides feedback to the MREP Coordinator
regarding the execution of the MREP.




Change 1, 10/13/2016                           7                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                         DoDI 1215.15, July 1, 2014

                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 ASD(M&RA)         Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs

 DoDD              DoD directive

 MOA               memorandum of agreement
 MOU               memorandum of understanding
 MREP              Military Reserve Exchange Program


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for purpose of this instruction.

MOA. An agreement between the DoD and the ministry of defense of a foreign nation
establishing an exchange program for individual Reserve Component members. Reference (c)
establishes DoD policy and procedures regarding negotiation and conclusion of such
international agreements.

MOU. A document written between parties to cooperate on an agreed upon project or meet an
agreed objective. The purpose of an MOU is to have a written understanding of the agreement
between parties.

MREP Administrator. A Service member designated by each Military Department to exercise
administrative control over the program within that Department.

MREP Coordinator. A designated Service member within the Office of the ASD(M&RA) who
coordinates policy issues relating to the program and serves as a point of contact for the MREP
Administrators.




Change 1, 10/13/2016                              8                                    GLOSSARY
