                            Department of Defense
                               INSTRUCTION

                                                                           NUMBER 6490.10
                                                                               March 26, 2012
                                            Incorporating Change 1, Effective October 28, 2015

                                                                                    USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Continuity of Behavioral Health Care for Transferring and Transitioning Service
             Members

References: (a) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
            (b) DoD 6025.18-R, “DoD Health Information Privacy Regulation,”
                January 24, 2003
            (c) Executive Order 13625 “Improving Access to Mental Health Services for
                Veterans, Service Members, and Military Families,” August 31, 2012


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in Reference (a), this Instruction establishes
policy for the Military Departments, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes guidelines for
establishment of Military Department policy and procedures to ensure continuity of behavioral
health (BH) care at the losing and gaining installations when Service members transition from
one health care provider (HCP) to another when transferring to a new duty station or
transitioning out of the Service.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to maintain continuity of BH care for a Service member who
requires further BH care or medical addiction treatment or follow-up. This will be accomplished
by transfer to another HCP and/or health care facility (HCF) at the time of transitioning to
another command, or when transitioning out of the Military Service, consistent with Reference
(b). When transitioning to another command, notification shall also be made to the gaining
commander when adherence to the ongoing treatment plan is deemed necessary to ensure
mission readiness and/or safety.
                                                                    DoDI 6490.10, March 26, 2012

4. RESPONSIBILITIES

   a. Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R)
monitors DoD compliance with this instruction through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Health Affairs.

    b. Director, Defense Health Agency (DHA). Under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(P&R) and through the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, the Director,
DHA:

       (1) Will publish, in coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments,
procedural guidance based on that developed by the Defense Center of Excellence for
Psychological Health and Traumatic Brain Injury in Transition Program Management Office,
consistent with the purposes of Executive Order 13635 (Reference (c)).

       (2) Ensures implementation, maintenance, and establishment of the Military Services
compliance reporting requirements for the inTransition program within the Military Health
System.

    c. Secretaries of the Military Departments. The Secretaries of the Military Departments
shall:

        (1) Develop and distribute departmental policies and implementing procedures regarding
the transition of a Service member’s current BH care plan to another HCP and/or HCF at a new
location in compliance with the Enclosure in this Instruction.

        (2) Ensure Service medical treatment facility (MTF) commander compliance with this
Instruction and that BH providers are made aware of the procedures by the installation medical
authorities.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles, references, releasability, effective date, and plain language for accuracy and
to make the inTransition program an opt-out instead of an opt-in support service in accordance
with Executive Order 13625 and Executive Actions for implementation.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective March 26, 2012.




Change 1, 10/28/2015                              2
                                            DoDI 6490.10, March 26, 2012




Enclosure
   Policy and Procedural Requirements
Glossary




Change 1, 10/28/2015                    3
                                                                  DoDI 6490.10, March 26, 2012

                                          ENCLOSURE

                       POLICY AND PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS


This enclosure describes guidelines for the development of Military Department policy and
implementing procedures.

    a. Service members, regardless of status, shall be given information on the possible need for
transfer of information upon transition as part of their initial orientation to treatment.

    b. When transferring to a new command, transfer of clinical care of a Service member
receiving BH care within the MTF system of care shall be arranged through direct HCP-to-HCP
communication via secure methods (e.g., encrypted e-mail), as clinically indicated by the HCP.
When separating from the military, this shall be arranged when the Service member provides
contact information for a provider/HCF with whom he or she has established, or with whom he
or she has agreed to have HCP involvement in establishing, follow-up care.

       (1) Such transfers shall be made to a HCP at the receiving clinic with a level of expertise
consistent with the Service member’s BH needs and treatment plan.

       (2) Uses and disclosures of BH information shall be in accordance with Reference (b).

   c. Consistent with Reference (b), the gaining HCP may request a copy of treatment notes
from the losing HCP to include:

       (1) Medication prescription and monitoring

       (2) Counseling session start and stop times

       (3) The modalities and frequencies of treatment furnished

       (4) Results of clinical tests

      (5) Any summary of diagnosis, functional status, the treatment plan, symptoms,
prognosis, and progress to date.

    d. Psychotherapy notes are not to be transferred from the originator of the notes to any other
party without written authorization from the individual for uses and disclosures unless explicit
criteria for disclosure without objection or consent are met in accordance with Reference (b).

    e. The installation’s out-processing checklist shall include a requirement that MTF personnel
pre-screen the Service member’s records.




Change 1, 10/28/2015                            4                                   ENCLOSURE
                                                                    DoDI 6490.10, March 26, 2012

       (1) If the Service member’s health record indicates specialty or primary care BH services
were received during the last 180 days of duty at the current installation, the Service member’s
record shall be reviewed to assure:

           (a) Prior care received has been appropriately terminated;

           (b) There is no known need for ongoing follow-up; and/or

           (c) If out-processing is required with the HCF in which he or she received care.

         (2) The tour of duty shall be inclusive of periods spent away from the primary command
(i.e., deployed or on a temporary duty assignment).

    f. BH records of personnel identified for permanent change of station (PCS) shall be
reviewed to determine appropriate action.

       (1) For open cases, the Service member:

          (a) Shall be made aware of available resources for care during and after the PCS
move to ensure no gaps in continuity of care and no unmet needs should an emergency arise.

          (b) Shall be provided with the losing and gaining command’s contact information
and emergency contact information for the time of travel during transition.

            (c) Shall be automatically enrolled in the InTransition program to assist with an
active service-to-civilian transition (information on the InTransition mental health coaching and
support program is available at https://www.health.mil/InTransition/default.aspx). A member
has the right to opt out of the program.

        (2) For open cases, the losing HCP shall ensure appropriate transfer of care occurs at the
time of transitioning to another command or out of military service by:

            (a) Contact, as applicable, with a privileged HCP at the gaining facility to directly
communicate the patient’s history, current status, needs during the transition period, and to
establish a follow-up appointment to ensure continuity of care. Ultimately, the plan for the
patient’s health during the transition period is a shared responsibility of the losing facility’s HCP
and the patient.

           (b) Prior to the patient’s PCS, and as clinically indicated, complete a summary of
treatment or an abbreviated summary in the electronic medical record.

          (c) If there are no adverse clinical implications, place a copy of the treatment
summary in the outpatient medical record as a termination note. Otherwise, an abbreviated
summary may be substituted.




Change 1, 10/28/2015                              5                                   ENCLOSURE
                                                                  DoDI 6490.10, March 26, 2012

        (3) For closed cases, the HCP shall document the decision to close a case in the
electronic medical record.

   g. The guidelines for the development of Military Department policy shall apply to:

        (1) Service members transferring within a Service, across Services, or from military to
civilian HCPs (including Department of Veterans Affairs HCPs).

        (2) Transfer of BH care during separation from service of Service members and/or their
family members receiving care from a HCP within the Military Health System, whose transition
shall result in initiating (or resuming) care with a civilian organization.




Change 1, 10/28/2015                            6                                  ENCLOSURE
                                                               DoDI 6490.10, March 26, 2012

                                        GLOSSARY


                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ASD(HA)                 Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs


BH                      behavioral health


DHA                     Defense Health Agency


HCF                     health care facility
HCP                     health care provider


MTF                     medical treatment facility


PCS                     permanent change of station


                                  PART II. DEFINITIONS

HCP. Defined in Reference (b) and inclusive of BH providers. This term also encompasses
sanctioned MTF- and/or HCP-delegated case management providers.

psychotherapy notes. Defined in Reference (b).




Change 1, 10/28/2015                             7                          GLOSSARY
