                            Department of Defense
                               DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 5200.43
                                                                                 October 1, 2012
                                                            Incorporating Change 3, July 14, 2020

                                                                                         USD(I&S)

SUBJECT: Management of the Defense Security Enterprise

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. Pursuant to the authorities in paragraph 1.10(h) of Executive Order 12333
(Reference (a)) and consistent with the delegations of authority in DoD Directive (DoDD)
5143.01 (Reference (b)), this Directive:

   a. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for the management of the Defense Security
Enterprise (DSE).

    b. Establishes the DSE Executive Committee (DSE ExCom) and provides direction for a
comprehensive DSE policy and oversight framework and governance structure to safeguard
personnel, information, operations, resources, technologies, and facilities against harm, loss, or
hostile acts and influences.

   c. Deconflicts the DSE from other DoD security related functions such as force protection
and provides for the alignment, synchronization, support, and integration of those related
security functions.

   d. Assigns responsibilities related to the DSE to the Defense Security Executive.

   e. Provides a common lexicon for the DSE.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD
Components”).
                                                                  DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

    b. Shall not alter or supersede the existing authority and policies of the Director of National
Intelligence (DNI) regarding the protection of intelligence sources, methods, and activities
pursuant to Reference (a) or the authorities delegated by the DNI to the heads of the Intelligence
Community elements.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. Security is a mission critical function of the DoD and its proper execution has a direct
impact on all DoD missions and capabilities and on the national defense. Therefore:

       (1) A DSE ExCom shall provide governance for the strategic administration and policy
coordination of the DSE. The DSE ExCom’s functions and membership are described in
Enclosure 2 of this Directive.

       (2) A Defense security framework and strategic plan shall provide an integrated, risk-
managed structure to guide DSE policy implementation and investment decisions, and to provide
a sound basis for oversight and evolution.

        (3) Standardized security processes shall be implemented, to the maximum extent
possible and with appropriate provisions for unique missions and security environments, across
the enterprise to ensure maximum interoperability, consistent quality assurance, and cost savings.

       (4) A core of highly qualified security professionals, certified in accordance with DoD
Manual 3305.13 (Reference (c)), who can effectively implement security policy and procedures
and anticipate and recommend changes needed to address changing operational requirements,
shall manage execution of DSE policy.

       (5) DSE investments shall be guided by a capital planning and investment control
process that is risk-managed and results-based and that informs the DoD’s planning,
programming, budgeting, and execution processes.

   b. The DSE shall measure performance in relation to DoD mission impact.

        (1) Security risk management practices shall focus on the potential for and degree of risk
of loss in relation to the cost or process burden accrued.

       (2) Performance measurement requires recognition that the absence of an unwanted
event may be evidence of a positive mission impact.

    c. The DoD will consider all means in preventing harm of its resources, to include
intelligence, information assurance, security, force protection, and mission assurance functions.




Change 3, 7/14/2020                              2
                                                                DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

   d. Security is the personal responsibility of all DoD personnel (military, civilian, and
contractor) and its proper implementation will be directed by commanders and other leaders at
each level of the DoD and fostered through awareness, education and training, and leadership.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 3. See Enclosure 4 for duties of the Defense Security
Executive.


6. RELEASABILITY Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This administrative change updates:

   a. The title of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) in accordance with Public Law 116-92
(Reference (s)), also known as the “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020.”

   b. Additional organizational changes reflecting direction in statute or Secretary and Deputy
Secretary of Defense direction.

  c. Administrative changes in accordance with current standards of the Office of the Chief
Management Officer of the Department of Defense


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective October 1, 2012.




                                                Ashton B. Carter
                                                Deputy Secretary of Defense
Enclosures
   1. References
   2. DSE ExCom
   3. Responsibilities
   4. Defense Security Executive
Glossary




Change 3, 7/14/2020                            3
                                                            DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

                                     ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES

(a) Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981, as
    amended
(b) DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I&S)),”
    October 24, 2014, as amended
(c) DoD Manual 3305.13, “DoD Security Accreditation and Certification,” March 14, 2011, as
    amended
(d) DoD Directive 5105.42, “Defense Security Service (DSS),” August 3, 2010, as amended
(e) DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
    Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(f) DoD Directive 5205.07, “Special Access Program (SAP) Policy,” July 1, 2010, as amended
(g) DoD Directive 5111.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” June 23, 2020
(h) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(i) DoD Directive 5118.03, “Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial
    Officer, Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO),” April 20, 2012
(j) DoD Directive 5144.02, “DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO),” April 22, 2013, as
    amended
(k) DoD Directive 5145.01, “General Counsel of the Department of Defense (GC DoD),”
    December 2, 2013, as amended
(l) DoD Directive 5105.53, “Director of Administration and Management (DA&M),”
    February 26, 2008
(m) DoD Instruction 3305.13, “DoD Security Training,” December 18, 2007, as amended
(n) DoD Directive 5106.01, “Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD),”
    April 20, 2012, as amended
(o) Executive Order 13434, “National Security Professional Development,” May 17, 2007
(p) Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
    Associated Terms,” current edition
(q) Section 401a(4) of title 50, United States Code
(r) DoD Instruction 8500.01, “Cybersecurity,” March 14, 2014
(s) Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
    December 20, 2019




Change 3, 7/14/2020                         4                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                          DSE EXCOM


1. PURPOSE. The DSE ExCom shall be the senior-level governance body for the strategic
administration and policy coordination of the DSE. In that role, it shall:

   a. In accordance with Reference (b), advise the USD(I&S), as the Defense Senior Security
Official, on security policy and training; provide recommendations on key policy decisions and
opportunities for standardization and improved effectiveness and efficiency; and facilitate cross-
functional security policy coordination.

    b. Assist with development of a Defense security framework that integrates, across all
security levels, personnel, physical, industrial, information, and operations security, as well as
special access program (SAP) security policy, critical program information protection policy,
and security training. This framework must align with and be informed by other DoD security
and security-related functions (e.g., counterintelligence, information assurance, nuclear physical
security, chemical and biological agent security, foreign disclosure, security cooperation,
technology transfer, export control, cyber security, anti-terrorism, force protection, mission
assurance, critical infrastructure, and insider threat policy).

   c. Oversee implementation of the Defense security framework.

   d. Approve the strategic plan and monitor its execution.

   e. Commission reviews and in-depth studies of security issues and, based on the results,
make recommendations for developing or improving policies, processes, procedures, and
products to address pervasive, enduring, or emerging security challenges.

   f. Review resource investments and priorities and recommend changes to the Defense
security program to the USD(I&S), through the Defense Security Executive.

    g. Provide a forum for identification, documentation, and dissemination of best practices,
including those associated with security risk management.

   h. Identify performance measures to be used to assess the effectiveness of the Defense
security program and its contribution to mission success.


2. MEMBERSHIP

   a. The voting membership of the DSE ExCom shall consist of:

       (1) The Defense Security Executive, who shall serve as the Chair.




Change 3, 7/14/2020                              5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

       (2) The DoD Component security program executives designated by the Secretaries of
the Military Departments and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in accordance with
paragraph 12.e of Enclosure 3 of this Directive.

       (3) Representatives of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial
Officer, Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO); the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)); the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P));
the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)); the DoD Chief
Information Officer (DoD CIO); the Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense
(CMO); and the General Counsel of the Department of Defense (GC DoD).

       (4) Director, DoD SAP Central Office (DoD SAPCO).

        (5) Representatives from the Counterintelligence and Security (CI&S) Directorate from
the Office of the Director for Defense Intelligence (Intelligence and Security) (DDI(I&S)).

   b. The Chair may invite representatives from Defense Security Service (DSS) and the
Offices of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense and the DNI and others as
appropriate to participate as non-voting members of the DSE ExCom.

   c. Additional voting members may be added, as necessary, upon recommendation to and
agreement of the DSE ExCom.


3. MEETINGS. The DSE ExCom shall meet no less than semiannually and as required at the
call of the Chair. The Chair shall set the agenda with input from the members.


4. SUBGROUPS AND WORKING GROUPS. The DSE ExCom may establish such standing
subgroups or ad-hoc working groups as deemed necessary. Each group shall have a charter or
specific tasking document. Meeting minutes shall be maintained and agreed to by the members
of the subgroup or working group and action items shall be tracked. Copies of minutes and
action items shall be provided to the executive secretariat for tracking on behalf of the DSE
ExCom. Reports of progress or action shall be provided to the DSE ExCom as requested, but no
less than annually.


5. ADMINISTRATION

    a. The Director, Office of the DDI(I&S), shall be the executive secretary and shall arrange
meetings; prepare, coordinate, and publish minutes; track action items; and perform other duties
as the Chair or DSE ExCom may assign.

   b. The DSE ExCom shall establish procedures for its operation and that of the subgroups or
working groups, as needed.




Change 3, 7/14/2020                             6                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(I&S). The USD(I&S) shall:

    a. Exercise security responsibilities as described in Reference (b), to include serving as the
DoD senior official reporting to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense for development
and integration of risk-managed security policies and programs. In carrying out these
responsibilities, the USD(I&S) shall:

        (1) Report to and advise the Secretary of Defense on the security implications of
strategic planning decisions and on other significant issues raised by the Defense Security
Executive or DSE ExCom.

        (2) Oversee Defense security policy, plans, programs, and resources and ensure that
security policies and programs are designed and managed to improve standards of performance,
economy, and efficiency.

    b. Coordinate with USD(AT&L), USD(P), and DoD CIO, as appropriate, to establish DSE
policy, procedures, and investment goals that align with those established for nuclear physical
security, chemical and biological agent security, information assurance, foreign disclosure,
security cooperation, technology transfer, export control, cyber security, antiterrorism, force
protection and mission assurance, and are informed by other security-related efforts (e.g., critical
infrastructure protection, insider threat initiatives).

    c. Coordinate with the USD(P&R) to ensure DSE policy, procedures, and investment goals
are harmonized with personnel policy and procedures.


2. DDI(I&S). The DDI(I&S), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), shall
serve as the Defense Security Executive and fulfill the responsibilities identified in Enclosure 4
of this Directive.


3. DIRECTOR, DSS. The Director, DSS, consistent with DoDD 5105.42 (Reference (d)) and
under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), in addition to the responsibilities in
section 12 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Provide input, as requested by the Defense Security Executive or DSE ExCom, for the
development of the Defense security framework and strategic plan.

   b. Establish security education, training, certification, and professional development
programs that are integrated with the DSE policy, procedures, and investment goals.




Change 3, 7/14/2020                              7                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012



4. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L), consistent with DoDD 5134.01 (Reference (e)) and in
addition to the responsibilities in section 13 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Appoint a representative at the general or flag officer level (or Senior Executive Service
(SES) equivalent) to serve on the DSE ExCom.

   b. Assist with development of the Defense security framework and strategic plan.

    c. Provide advice, as may be necessary or requested, to the Defense Security Executive and
the DSE ExCom within assigned areas of responsibility, including procurement policy and
Defense Industrial Base implementation.


5. DIRECTOR, DoD SAPCO. The Director, DoD SAPCO, administratively supported by the
USD(AT&L) and reporting to the Deputy Secretary of Defense, shall, consistent with DoDD
5205.07 (Reference (f)):

   a. Serve on the DSE ExCom.

   b. Assist with development of the Defense security framework and strategic plan and
coordinate on SAP security policy developed by a working group overseen by the DSE ExCom.


6. USD(P). The USD(P), consistent with DoDD 5111.01 (Reference (g)) and in addition to the
responsibilities in section 13 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Appoint a representative at the general or flag officer level (or SES equivalent) to serve on
the DSE ExCom.

   b. Assist with development of the Defense security framework and strategic plan.

    c. Provide advice, as may be necessary or requested, to the Defense Security Executive and
the DSE ExCom on security policy issues as they pertain to countering weapons of mass
destruction programs; technology security policies on international transfers of defense-related
goods, services, and technologies; and global security cooperation programs.


7. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R), consistent with DoDD 5124.02 (Reference (h)) and in addition
to the responsibilities in section 13 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Appoint a representative at the general or flag officer level (or SES equivalent) to serve on
the DSE ExCom.

    b. Provide advice, as may be necessary or requested, to the Defense Security Executive and
the DSE ExCom on civilian and military personnel issues, including those related to position



Change 3, 7/14/2020                              8                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

sensitivity designation, performance standards, evaluation criteria, and alignment of suitability
matters in accordance with Joint Security and Suitability Reform Team initiatives.

   c. Assist with development of the Defense security framework and strategic plan.


8. USD(C)/CFO. The USD(C)/CFO, consistent with DoDD 5118.03 (Reference (i)) and in
addition to the responsibilities in section 13 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Appoint a representative at the general or flag officer level (or SES equivalent) to serve on
the DSE ExCom.

    b. Provide advice, as may be necessary or requested, to the Defense Security Executive and
the DSE ExCom on issues related to security funding, costing, and performance measures.


9. DoD CIO. The DoD CIO, consistent with DoDD 5144.1 (Reference (j)) and in addition to the
responsibilities in section 13 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Appoint a representative at the general or flag officer level (or SES equivalent) to serve on
the DSE ExCom.

    b. Assist with development of the Defense security framework and strategic plan and shall
coordinate with the USD(I&S) to establish information assurance policy that aligns with the DSE
policy, procedures, and investment goals.


10. GC DoD. The GC DoD, consistent with DoDD 5145.01 (Reference (k)) and in addition to
the responsibilities in section 13 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Appoint a representative at the general or flag officer level (or SES equivalent) to serve on
the DSE ExCom.

   b. Provide legal advice and counsel, as may be necessary or requested, to the Defense
Security Executive and the DSE ExCom.


11. CMO. The CMO, consistent with DoDD 5105.53 (Reference (l)) and in addition to the
responsibilities in section 13 of this enclosure, shall appoint a representative at the general or flag
officer level (or SES equivalent) to serve on the DSE ExCom.


12. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components, who have
overall authority and responsibility for implementation and execution of the security program
within their organizations, shall:




Change 3, 7/14/2020                               9                                  ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

   a. Ensure that DoD security policies and guidance are implemented.

    b. Promote proactive, informed execution of security requirements within their Component,
predicated upon the premise that security is everyone’s responsibility on a day-to-day basis, and
provide oversight to confirm that all Component personnel understand their roles and
responsibilities in ensuring DoD security.

   c. Establish programs to hire, train, and retain a professional security workforce consistent
with this Directive, DoD Instruction 3305.13 (Reference (m)), and Reference (c).

   d. Align the DoD Component’s security investment portfolio with the DSE policies and
guidance.

    e. Designate a single DoD Component security program executive, at the general or flag
officer level (or SES equivalent), who shall:

        (1) Have knowledge of the security disciplines within the DSE necessary to facilitate and
oversee implementation of the Defense security framework and strategic plan and the
requirements of this Directive within the Component. (This Directive does not affect the ability
of the Head of the DoD Component to designate separate officials to direct and oversee specific
security functions or disciplines.)

        (2) Provide leadership for and maintain cognizance over the Component’s process for
resourcing its security program, to ensure adequate investment of resources to support an
integrated security program, and provide information on those efforts as requested by the
Defense Security Executive.

      (3) Share cost, schedule, and performance data regarding the DoD Component’s security
program and investments with the DSE ExCom as needed for execution of its responsibilities.

    f. Designate qualified personnel for sub-groups when requested by the DSE ExCom (with
the exception of the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, which
conducts and supervises audits and investigations relating to the programs and operations of the
DoD in accordance with DoDD 5106.01 (Reference (n))).


13. HEADS OF THE OSD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the OSD Components, according to
their responsibility and authority for assigned functional areas, shall:

   a. Ensure that DoD security policies and guidance are implemented.

    b. Promote proactive, informed execution of security requirements within their Component,
predicated upon the premise that security is everyone’s responsibility on a day-to-day basis, and
provide oversight to confirm that all Component personnel understand their roles and
responsibilities in ensuring DoD security.




Change 3, 7/14/2020                             10                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

   c. Establish programs to hire, train, and retain a professional security workforce consistent
with this Directive and References (c) and (m).

    d. Provide leadership for and maintain cognizance over processes for resourcing Component
security programs, to ensure investment of adequate resources for an integrated security
program, foster alignment of the Component’s security investment portfolio with the DSE
policies and guidance, and provide information on those efforts as requested by the Defense
Security Executive.

   e. Share cost, schedule, and performance data regarding the OSD Component’s security
program and investments with the DSE ExCom as needed for execution of its responsibilities.

   f. Designate qualified personnel for sub-groups when requested by the DSE ExCom.




Change 3, 7/14/2020                             11                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

                                         ENCLOSURE 4

                             DEFENSE SECURITY EXECUTIVE


The Defense Security Executive, under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S) and
consistent with Reference (b), shall:

   a. Develop policy and an integrated Defense security framework and strategic plan for the
management and oversight of the DSE and in that role shall:

       (1) Be responsible for cross functional security coordination.

       (2) Report to and advise the USD(I&S) on the security implications of strategic planning
decisions and on other significant issues, including those identified or raised by the DSE ExCom.

       (3) With the advice and coordination of the DSE ExCom, develop, maintain, and
implement an integrated, cohesive Defense security framework and strategic plan; establish
performance measures to assess implementation; and provide oversight to ensure compliance. In
executing this responsibility, the Defense Security Executive shall:

          (a) Coordinate with the DSE ExCom in the development of an integrated security
framework for the DSE and when recommending security policy and procedures to facilitate its
implementation.

            (b) Ensure the Defense security framework includes provisions for access to
integrated education, training, and professional experience opportunities for security
professionals, in accordance with Executive Order 13434 (Reference (o)) and References (c) and
(m); and to security awareness training for all DoD personnel.

            (c) Provide guidance on, and a methodology for, use of the Defense security
framework to facilitate tracking security costs, estimating future years resource requirements,
measuring return on security investments, and making risk-managed decisions regarding use of
security resources.

            (d) Develop, coordinate, maintain, and implement a strategic plan that describes how
the integrated security framework and the activities, functions, and processes required for its
execution will be implemented and measured to support accomplishment of the DoD mission.

    b. On behalf of the USD(I&S), propose DoD resource programs, formulate budget estimates,
recommend resource investments and priorities, and monitor the implementation of approved
programs in order to ensure adherence to approved security policy and planning guidance.

    c. Provide oversight of the DSE and the individual constituent security disciplines, with a
focus on identifying opportunities for increased standardization and improved performance,
effectiveness, and efficiency.



Change 3, 7/14/2020                             12                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012



   d. Chair the DSE ExCom.

   e. Collaborate with the DNI and other external organizations responsible for the
development and implementation of national security policy and raise appropriate issues to the
DSE ExCom for their consideration.




Change 3, 7/14/2020                            13                               ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                  DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 CMO             Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense


 DNI             Director of National Intelligence
 DoD CIO         DoD Chief Information Officer
 DoD SAPCO       DoD SAP Central Office
 DoDD            DoD Directive
 DSE             Defense Security Enterprise
 DSE ExCom       Defense Security Enterprise Executive Committee
 DSS             Defense Security Service
 DUSD(I&S)       Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security


 GC DoD          General Counsel of the Department of Defense


 SAP             special access program
 SES             Senior Executive Service


 USD(AT&L) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
 USD(C)/CFO Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
            Department of Defense
 USD(I&S)   Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
 USD(P)     Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
 USD(P&R)   Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

antiterrorism. Defined in the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference (p)).

controlled unclassified information. Unclassified information that requires safeguarding or
dissemination controls, pursuant to and consistent with applicable laws, regulations, Executive
orders, and Government-wide policies.




Change 3, 7/14/2020                             14                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012

Defense Security Executive. The official under USD(I&S) authority, direction, and control who
has responsibility for policy development and oversight of the DSE. The DDI(I&S) is
designated to be the Defense Security Executive.

Defense security framework. Structure or architecture describing how security disciplines relate
to and interact with each other.

Defense security program. The programmatic planning, expenditures, and return on investment
estimating process for the DSE.

DoD Component security program executive. The designated individual with responsibility for
and authority to accomplish security program objectives for development, production, and
sustainment to meet the user’s operational needs. The security program executive shall be
accountable for credible cost, schedule, and performance reporting to the Defense Security
Executive.

DSE. The organizations, infrastructure, and measures (to include policies, processes,
procedures, and products) in place to safeguard DoD personnel, information, operations,
resources, technologies, and facilities against harm, loss, or hostile acts and influences. This
system of systems comprises personnel, physical, industrial, information, and operations
security, as well as SAP security policy, critical program information protection policy, and
security training. It addresses, as part of information security, classified information, including
sensitive compartmented information, and controlled unclassified information. It aligns with
counterintelligence, information assurance, foreign disclosure, security cooperation, technology
transfer, export control, cyber security, nuclear physical security, chemical and biological agent
security, antiterrorism, force protection, and mission assurance policy and is informed by other
security related efforts.

heads of the Intelligence Community elements. Heads of elements or agencies of the U.S.
Government identified in or designated pursuant to section 401a(4) of title 50, United States
Code (Reference (q)) or section 3.5(h) of Reference (a).

industrial security. A multi-disciplinary security program concerned with the protection of
classified information developed by or entrusted to U.S. industry.

information. Any knowledge that can be communicated or documentary material, regardless of
its physical form or characteristics that is owned by, produced by or for, or is under the control of
the U.S. Government.

information assurance. Defined in DoDI 8500.01 (Reference (r)).

information security. The security discipline concerned with implementation of a system of
administrative policies and procedures for identifying, controlling, and protecting from
unauthorized disclosure information that is authorized protection by Executive order, statute, or
regulation. Information security includes protection of classified, controlled unclassified, and
sensitive compartmented information.



Change 3, 7/14/2020                              15                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                    DoDD 5200.43, October 1, 2012



insider threat. A person with authorized access who uses that access, wittingly or unwittingly, to
harm national security interests and/or national security through unauthorized disclosure, data
modification, espionage, terrorism, or kinetic actions resulting in the loss or degradation of
resources or capabilities.

operations security. A process of identifying critical information and analyzing friendly actions
attendant to military operations and other activities to:

   Identify those actions that can be observed by adversary intelligence systems.

   Determine indicators and vulnerabilities that adversary intelligence systems might obtain that
could be interpreted or pieced together to derive critical intelligence in time to be useful to
adversaries and determine which of these represent an unacceptable risk.

    Select and execute countermeasures that eliminate or reduce to an acceptable level the risks
to friendly actions and operations.

personnel security. The security discipline that assesses the loyalty, reliability, and
trustworthiness of individuals for initial and continued eligibility for access to classified
information or assignment in sensitive positions.

physical security. The security discipline concerned with physical measures designed to
safeguard personnel; to prevent unauthorized access to equipment, installations, material, and
documents; and to safeguard them against espionage, sabotage, damage, and theft.

professional security workforce. Workforce comprised of security professionals.

SAP. A program established for a specific class of classified information that imposes
safeguarding and access requirements that exceed those normally required for information at the
same classification level.

security. Proactive measures adopted to safeguard personnel, information, operations, resources,
technologies, facilities, and foreign relations against harm, loss, or hostile acts and influences.

security professional. An individual who is educated, trained, and experienced in one or more
security disciplines and provides advice and expertise to senior officials on the effective and
efficient implementation, operation, and administration of the organization’s security programs.

sensitive compartmented information. Classified national intelligence concerning or derived
from intelligence sources, methods, or analytical processes that is required to be protected within
formal access control systems established and overseen by the DNI.




Change 3, 7/14/2020                               16                                     GLOSSARY
