ONR CSO Announcement # N0001424SC001
                               Amendment 01




               Automated Target Recognition for Rapid Area
               Detection “ATR for RAD” and Rapid Large Area
               Clearance of Unexploded Ordnance “RLAC”
               Commercial Solutions Opening (CSO)
The purposes of Amendment 01 to Commercial Solutions Opening N0001424SC001 are as
follows:

1. Change Phase II: Solution Briefs submission date from 20 February 2024 to 23 February
2024. Updated date is highlighted in yellow.

2. Change Notification of Selection for Phase III date from 27 February 2024 to 29 February
2024. Updated date is highlighted in yellow.




                                                                                              i
                        TABLE OF CONTENTS

Section                                   Page #
I. OVERVIEW OF THE RESEARCH                        1
OPPORTUNITY
   A. Required Overview Content                    1
      1. Federal Awarding Agency Name              1
      2. Funding Opportunity Title                 1
      3. Announcement Type                         1
      4. Commercial Solutions Opening              1
      Number
      5. Phases and Key Dates                      1
     6. Agreements Officer                         2
II. DETAILED INFORMATION                           3
ABOUT THE RESEARCH
OPPORTUNITY
   A. Program Description                          3
   B. Federal Award Information                    6
     1. Anticipated Individual Awards              6
     2. Funded Amount and Period of                6
     Performance
     3. Instrument Type(s)                         7
   C. Application and Submission                   8
   Information
      1. Address to Request (Access)               8
      Application Package
      2. Content and Format of                     8
      Application Submission
      3. Unique Entity Identifier (UEI)            13
      and System for Award Management
      (SAM)
      4. Submission Dates and Times                14
    D. Application Review Information              14
     1. Criteria                                   14
     2. Review and Selection Process               17
     E. Federal Award Administration               18
            Information
          1. Federal Award Notices                 18

                                                        ii
   2. Administrative and National      18
          Policy Requirements
F. Federal Awarding Agency             23
        Contacts
  1. Communications                    23
  2. Questions of a Technical Nature   23
  3. Questions of a Business Nature    23




                                            iii
   I. OVERVIEW OF THE RESEARCH OPPORTUNITY

  A. Required Overview Content

   1. Federal Awarding Agency Name

       Office of Naval Research,
       One Liberty Center
       875 N. Randolph Street
       Arlington, VA 22203-1995

    2. Funding Opportunity Title

      Automated Target Recognition for Rapid Area Detection “ATR for RAD”
  and Rapid Large Area Clearance of Unexploded Ordnance “RLAC”

   3. Announcement Type

          Initial Announcement

   4. Commercial Solutions Opening Number

          N0001424SC001

   5. Phases and Key Dates (See also Section D.4)



                         Anticipated Schedule of Events *
               Event                            FY24 Date       Time (Local
                                                               Eastern Time)
Phase I: Industry Day Presentation         6 February 2024        3:00 pm
Phase II: Solution Briefs                 23 February 2024        3:00 pm
      Notification of Selection for       29 February 2024          23:59
      Phase III
Phase III: Oral Presentation                  4-6 March 2024       TBD
      Notification of Selection for            8 March 2024        23:59
      Phase IV
Phase IV: Test and Evaluation(T&E)       18-22 March 2024          TBD
                                             (Track 1a),
                                         Up to 13 December
                                          2024 (Track 1b &
                                              Track 2)
      Notification of Selection for      12 April 2024 to 17       23:59
      Phase V                               January 2025
Phase V: Full Proposals                  19 April 2024 – 30       3:00 pm
                                           September 2024

   CSO                        N0001424SC001                                 1
Phase VI: Integration into a               FY24 Q3-Q4, FY25
Government-led System                             Q1-Q4
          *These dates are estimates as of the date of this announcement.


   ONR expects to issue new CSO Announcements in FY25 and FY26 for this
   program. As part of the proposal process, proposers are advised to review the
   newly issued CSO at the start of each fiscal year. The new CSO Announcements
   will contain important updates.

  6. Agreements Officer - The Agreements Officer will negotiate directly with the
  Company on the terms and conditions of the Other Transaction Agreement
  (OTA), including payments, and will execute the OTA on behalf of the
  Government. Only an Agreements Officer has the authority to enter into, or
  modify, a binding agreement on behalf of the Government.




   CSO                        N0001424SC001                                        2
II. DETAILED INFORMATION ABOUT THE RESEARCH OPPORTUNITY

A. Program Description

   The Office of Naval Research (ONR) solicits proposals under this Commercial
   Solutions Opening (CSO #N0001424SC001) under 10 U.S.C. §3458 – Authority
   to Acquire Innovative Commercial Products and Commercial Services using
   General Solicitation Competitive Procedures.

   The Joint Service Explosive Ordnance Disposal (JEOD) Community seeks
   commercial solutions for a lightweight capability that can rapidly assess
   unexploded ordnance (UXO) in large operational areas and mitigate UXO at
   standoff distances. UXO is also referred to as targets herein. In this
   opportunity, an airfield will be considered the large operational area for rapid
   assessment and clearance of UXO. This CSO has two tracks:

   1. Track 1, Automated Target Recognition for Rapid Area Detection, “ATR for
   RAD”: JEOD seeks innovative, commercial solutions to enable an automated
   target recognition (ATR) capability for rapid assessment including detection,
   identification and mapping of unexploded ordnance in large operational airfields
   (further referenced as the “ATR for RAD”). This track seeks lightweight
   capabilities for rapid technology transition to the Joint Service EOD community
   as part of a larger prototype and experimentation program. ATR for RAD is the
   first step to support the full mission for rapid clearance of UXO on airfields.
   Proposers can provide algorithms only (Track 1a) or platform, sensor and
   algorithm solutions (Track 1b).

   2. Track 2, Rapid Large Area Clearance, “RLAC”: JEOD seeks a full mission
   solution for the rapid assessment as well as the clearance of UXO at standoff
   distances and reduced operational timelines for detection, location, mapping,
   identification and UXO clearance or target mitigation (further referenced as
   “Rapid Large Area Clearance or RLAC”).

   Proposers can participate in both Track 1 and Track 2 opportunities. A
   Government Furnished Information (GFI) package will be provided to registered
   Industry Day participants. It will include UXO target characterization data,
   labelled data sets and bases for metric calculations. Registrants will receive the
   GFI target data via box.com and must enable this capability within their
   institution systems. The Government will provide test facilities and capabilities
   for Track 1 ATR capabilities, which will be evaluated for selection for awards.
   For Track 2, the Government will provide a series of test opportunities for
   incremental system of system demonstrations of commercial solutions.

   Operational Problem & Desired Solutions

   Section 1.1: Problem


   CSO                        N0001424SC001                                           3
JEOD forces require the capability to rapidly detect, identify and clear explosive
hazards impeding operations, especially in and around critical infrastructure and
logistical hubs. Hundreds to thousands of UXO threats remain after a single
engagement, which will prevent airfields from being operational, deny maneuver
and risk personnel by their presence. These hazards can result from several
sources ranging from intended emplacement to remnants of battlefield debris.
Application of technology advancements and innovations are required to reduce
the timeline for rapidly assessing, detecting, identifying and clearing UXO as
well as providing EOD forces with increased standoff from these threats during
operations.

Section 1.2: Desired Solutions

JEOD forces seek novel solutions that enable lightweight capabilities for RLAC
Operations of UXO in cluttered airfields. Desired solutions are organized into
two tracks, which reflect the initial operational step of Rapid Area Detection
(RAD) of UXO and the overall mission of RLAC mitigation of UXO at standoff
distances. Desired solutions for Track 1 require ATR sensors and algorithms
with unmanned, human teamed platforms to close the Rapid Area Detection
(RAD) gap for UXO in cluttered airfields. Track 1 is further referenced as ATR
for RAD. Selected Track 1 Awardees will integrate into a system of systems
clearance advanced technology prototype project (FY24-FY25). Track 2,
further referenced as RLAC, seeks a commercial, full-mission solution of rapid
detection to UXO clearance and provides additional time and testing
opportunities with milestones for participants to address explosive safety and
complex integration challenges for mitigation of UXO at standoff distances.
Section 2 provides further details on proposed solution qualities and preferences.

Section 2: Proposed Solution Qualities & Preferences

This section describes proposed solution qualities and preferences for Track 1,
ATR for RAD and Track 2, RLAC.

Section 2.1: Track 1 -Automated Target Recognition for Rapid Area Detection
of UXO (“ATR for RAD”) Solution Qualities & Preferences

JEOD forces seek a lightweight, commercial solution to detect, locate, map and
identify UXO in large, cluttered airfield environment. The desired solution is
an Automated Target Recognition capability that is able to detect, identify and
map both small (golf ball) size UXO and up through larger UXO, such as
155mm munitions. It is preferred that the capability can also be trained to
identify other hazards such as impact craters, UXO penetrator holes and debris.
The small target detection and clutter reduction are challenging, as they will
require algorithms that can process data obtained from sensors with minimal
pixels on target or pixel density. The desired solution is an edge-processed
capability with a high probability of detection/identification, low false alarm rate
and low circular error of probability for geolocation of UXO. The desired
solution space could consider a small-unmanned system with up to two Small
CSO                        N0001424SC001                                           4
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (sUAS) and one medium sized EOD robot that can
autonomously survey the airfield and rapidly assess the operational
environment. It is preferred that identified UXO geolocations are presented in
the Air Force Research Lab Team Awareness Kit (TAK).

Track 1a solutions for ATR for RAD can be algorithms that can process video
feed collected via the Government sUAS survey in order to meet evaluation
criteria. A preferred solution is to be able to train on-site.

Track 1b solution proposers can demonstrate their developed capability from
their own unmanned system(s), sensor package and algorithms. Proposers must
provide Small UAS and sensor systems that are compliant with Department of
Defense standards and must meet all test range environmental and safety
standards for their systems and pilots. It is preferred that sensors and unmanned
platforms have well defined physical and logical interfaces. A preferred
solution is to be able to train on site.

Section 2.2: Track 2 - Rapid Large Area Clearance (“RLAC”) – UXO detect,
locate, map, identification and clearance Solution Qualities & Preferences

Track 2, RLAC solutions would incorporate the above Track 1 assessment
solution qualities and preferences in addition to the following:

• The RLAC capability would be an end-to-end, lightweight, mission that
enables standoff assessment and UXO geolocation handover to clearance tools
to mitigate or clear UXO.

• The RLAC capability would be a modular architecture with known interface
control documents for integration with multiple services and the capability to
handover UXO geolocations to tools. The Team Awareness Kit (TAK) is
preferred.

• The RLAC capability would mitigate or clear (render safe, neutralize, disrupt)
with techniques that are small and can be deployed via small unmanned systems
as much as practicable.

ONR reserves the right to fund all, some, or none of the proposals received
under this CSO. The Government provides no funding for direct reimbursement
of proposal development costs. Technical and cost proposals (or any other
material) submitted in response to this CSO will not be returned. It is the policy
of ONR to treat all proposals submitted under this CSO as sensitive competitive
information and to disclose their contents only for the purposes of evaluation.




CSO                        N0001424SC001                                             5
   B. Federal Award Information

1. Anticipated Individual Awards - More than one OTA-Prototype and/or OTA-
production award may result from this CSO. Companies are advised that any Prototype OTA
awarded in response to this solicitation may result in the direct award of a follow-on
production contract or agreement without the use of further competitive procedures. Follow-
on production activities may result from successful prototype completion and subject to
funds availability.

A follow-on production contract or agreement will be available for use by one or more
organizations within the Department of Defense (DoD). As a result, the magnitude of the
follow-on production contract or agreement could be significantly larger than that of the
Prototype OT agreement. All Prototype OT agreements will include the following statement
relative to the potential for follow-on production: In accordance with 10 USC U.S.C. § 4022,
ONR may award a follow-on production contract or OTA for any OTA awarded under this
CSO if: (1) the participant(s) in the OTA successfully completed the entire prototype project
provided for in that OTA, as modified, and (2) the OTA provides for the award of a follow-
on production contract or OTA to the participant(s).

In accordance with 10 U.S.C. §3458 any resultant OTA will be limited to fixed-price or
fixed-price incentive arrangements.

ONR’s OTA-Prototype template may be provided by request. Contact the Agreements
Specialist listed in Section G.3.

2. Funded Amount and Period of Performance - Up to $25 million over three (3) years
may be available for awards under this announcement, subject to availability of funds. The
table below provides guidance by topic. The breakout of topic investments may not equal the
total amount listed below due to the uncertainty associated with the availability of funding.
Actual award funding levels will be dependent on both the cost of the proposed research and
individual agency and topic funding levels.

The funded amount and period of performance of each proposal selected for award may
vary depending on the research area and the technical approach to be pursued by the
offeror selected. Individual awards may be fully funded for an entire performance period
or incrementally funded, with continued funding dependent on funding availability, the
assigned Program Officer’s assessment of work progress, and the award’s terms.




            CSO                       N0001424SC001                                         6
Topic Name                                  Anticipated Individual Award Total
                                            # of        Amount Range     Performance
                                            Awards      per year         Period
                                                                         (years)


Track 1: Automated Target                   2-6            150K-3.0M           2-3
Recognition for Rapid Area                                 (OTA prototype)
Detection, “ATR for RAD”
                                                           OTA production –
                                                           TBD
Track 2: Rapid Large Area                   1-3            150K-5.0M (OTA 2-3
Clearance, “RLAC”                                          prototype)

                                                           OTA production
                                                           TBD

 3. Instrument Type(s) - It is anticipated that awards will be in the form of Other Transaction
     Agreements. However, ONR reserves the right to award contracts to appropriate parties,
     should the situation warrant use of an instrument other than an OTA.

    ONR under the authority of 10 U.S. Code § 4022 seeks to partner with nontraditional and
    traditional defense contractors and non-profit research institutions to carry out prototype,
    and possible production projects “…to plan, foster, and encourage scientific research in
    recognition of its paramount importance as related to the maintenance of future naval
    power, and the preservation of national security.”

    One of the following conditions must also be met for ONR to award the prototype project.
    Enumerated items are not required to be addressed specifically in the proposal (with the
    exception of the 1/3 cost-share if applicable), but will be reviewed to determine statutory
    compliance:
           a. At least one nontraditional defense contractor (NDC) or nonprofit research
               institution participation.
           b. All significant participants in the transition are small businesses or NDCs.
           c. At least 1/3 of the total cost of the prototype project are funds provided by
               other than the Government.

    To seek innovative technologies in response to this CSO, the proposal, and award must
    contain the following elements:
           a. Innovative commercial products and commercial services definition is the
               following: (1) any technology, process, or method, including research and
               development, that is new as of the date of submission of a proposal; or (2) any
               application that is new as of the date of submission of a proposal of a
               technology, process, or method existing as of such date.
           b. Products and services acquired using the authority under subsection shall be
               treated as commercial products and commercial services.


             CSO                        N0001424SC001                                          7
The following provides brief descriptions of the OTA potential instrument types:

       a.     Other Transaction Agreement (OTA) for Prototype: A legal instrument,
              consistent with 10 U.S. Code § 4022, which may be used for prototype
              projects directly relevant to enhancing the mission effectiveness of
              military personnel and the supporting platforms, systems, components,
              or materials proposed to be acquired or developed by the Department of
              Defense, or for improvement of platforms, systems, components, or
              materials in use by the armed forces. The effort covered under an OTA
              shall not be duplicative of effort being conducted under an existing DoD
              program. Please refer to the DoD “Other Transactions Guide” dated July
              2023, for additional information. This document, along with other OTA
              resources, may be accessed at the following link:
              https://www.acq.osd.mil/asda/dpc/cp/policy/other-policy-areas.html

       b.     Other Transaction Agreement (OTA) for Production: A legal instrument,
              consistent with 10 U.S. Code § 4022, which may be used for
              organizations seeking to use follow-on production authority after
              successful completion of a prototype OTA. Successful completion can
              occur prior to the conclusion of a prototype project to allow the
              Government to transition any aspect of the prototype project determined
              to provide utility into production while other aspects of the prototype
              project have yet to be completed. Please refer to the DoD “Other
              Transactions Guide” dated July 2023, for additional information. This
              document, along with other OTA resources, may be accessed at the
              following link: https://www.acq.osd.mil/asda/dpc/cp/policy/other-policy-
              areas.html

C. Application and Submission Information

1. Address to Request (Access) Application Package - This CSO may be accessed
   from the sites below. Amendments, if any, to this CSO will be posted to these
   websites when they occur. Interested parties are encouraged to periodically check
   these websites for updates and amendments.

       a.     Sam.gov - Contract Opportunities (https://www.sam.gov/)
       b.     ONR website https://www.nre.navy.mil/work-with-us/funding-
              opportunities/announcements

2. Content and Format of Application Submission

a. General Information

All submissions will be protected from unauthorized disclosure in accordance with
applicable law, and DoD/DoN regulations. Offerors are expected to appropriately mark
each page of their submission that contains any proprietary information.

Titles given to the submissions should be descriptive of the work they cover and not be
merely a copy of the title of this announcement.
        CSO                       N0001424SC001                                          8
b. Security Classification

An unclassified Government Furnished Information (GFI) package will be provided to
registered Industry Day participants. It will include unclassified UXO target
characterization data, labelled data sets and bases for metric calculations.

If a classified proposal is submitted and selected for award, the resultant contract will be
unclassified.

Classified proposals shall be submitted directly to the attention of ONR’s Document
Control Unit at the following address and marked in the following manner:

   OUTSIDE ENVELOPE - (no classification marking):

   “Office of Naval Research
   Attn: Document Control Unit
   ONR Code 54
   875 North Randolph Street
   Arlington, VA 22203-1995”

   The inner wrapper of the classified Solution Brief and/or Full Proposal should be
   addressed to the attention of the cognizant Technical POC, Jean McGovern, ONR
   Code 32 and marked in the following manner:

   INNER ENVELOPE - (stamped with the overall classification of the material)

   “Program Name:
   Office of Naval Research
   ATTN: ONR Program Officer Jean McGovern
   ONR Code: Code 32
   875 North Randolph Street
   Arlington, VA 22203-1995”

c. Non-Proprietary Submission

For all proposals, a non-proprietary version of submissions must be submitted. Do not
put proprietary data or markings in or on submitted documents. For proposals containing
data that the offeror does not want disclosed to the public for any purpose, or used by the
Government except for evaluation purposes, the contractor shall mark the title page with
the following legend:

     “This proposal includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the Government
     and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed--in whole or in part--for any
     purpose other than to evaluate the proposal. If, however, a contract is awarded to
     this offeror as a result of--or in connection with-- the submission of this data, the
     Government shall have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent
     provided in the resulting contract. This restriction does not limit the Government’s
        CSO                         N0001424SC001                                              9
     right to use information contained in this data if is obtained from another source
     without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in (insert
     numbers or other identification of sheets).”

Each sheet of data that the offeror wishes to restrict must be marked with the
following legend:

     “Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on
     the title page of this proposal.”

d. Content for Submission & Participation

Phase Description Participation

                Phase I - Industry Day Presentation: The ONR Joint Service Explosive
       Ordnance Disposal Program will conduct an unclassified Industry Day briefing for
       potential Offerors for the Automated Target Recognition for Rapid Area Detection
       “ATR for RAD” & Rapid Large Area Clearance of Unexploded Ordnance “RLAC”
       Commercial Solutions Opening (CSO) on 06 February 2024 at the Holiday Inn
       Arlington at Ballston, 4610 N. Fairfax Drive, Arlington, VA. The Industry Day will
       be a combination of in-person and virtual (via MS TEAMS) attendance. The
       purpose of the meeting will be to provide potential Offerors with a better
       understanding of the scope of the Program and objectives of this CSO. A
       Government Furnished Information (GFI) package will be provided to registered
       Industry Day participants. It will include UXO target characterization data, labelled
       data sets and the basis for performance metric calculations. Registrants will receive
       the GFI target data via box.com and must enable this capability within their
       institutional systems (company or standard Box.com access).

              The briefing will be held in-person from 9:30am-1130am Local Eastern
       Time with check-in beginning at 8:45am 06 February 2024. All attendees are
       required to pre-register by COB 02 February 2024 via the following link:

               https://www.onlineregistrationcenter.com/ATR2024

               Please click “In-person” under “Attendance” in the link if attending in-
       person. You will also be required to annotate your company’s active Unique Entity
       Identifier (UEI) issued by the System for Award Management (SAM). You can
       check the status of your UEI or create a new UEI by going to the SAM.gov website:
       SAM.gov | Duns - Sam UEI. Though the Industry Day is an unclassified event,
       audio or visual recordings/pictures are prohibited. Pre-registration via enclosed link
       is mandatory; WALK-IN REGISTRATION WILL NOT BE PERMITTED.

               If attending the Industry Day virtually, please click the “Virtual via MS
       TEAMS Link” box in the pre-registration site, under “Attendance”, and a link will
       be provided by COB on 05 February 2024, following successful registration, to your
       registered email address.

        CSO                        N0001424SC001                                           10
        If you are unable to attend the Industry Day in-person or virtually, and
would still like more information, please click the “Unable to attend in-person or
virtually, but interested in pursuing participation in this CSO” box under
“Attendance” and complete the registration. Upon confirmation of your company’s
active UEI, we will send additional information for participation in the CSO
Evaluation to the TPOC listed. Industry Briefs will be accessible on the GFI
Box.com site.

        Phase II - Solution Briefs: The due date for FY24 solution briefs is no later
than 3:00 PM Local Eastern Time on 23 February 2024.

       Solutions briefs shall be no more than seven power point slides and
submitted via email as pdf files with attachments that are under 20MB. The
following is a guide for suggested contents:

         • Title Page: Please include a title referencing the ONR CSO name; indicate
if the brief addresses Track 1 (a or b) or Track 2; company name; date; and a point
of contact name, e-mail address, phone number, and address (this will not count
against the page limit)

       • Executive Summary: A short summary of the technology.

        • Technology Concept: Describe the unique aspects of your technology and
the proposed work as it relates to the ATR for RAD and/or RLAC tracks to which
you are responding. Identify whether the effort includes the pilot or demonstration
of existing commercial technology (identified as commercially ready and viable
technology), or the development of technology for the applications. If development
or adaptation is proposed, identify a suggested path to mature your technology.
Lastly, identify and label the pages which aspects of your technology may be
considered proprietary. Diagrams or graphics depicting the essence of the proposed
solution are strongly encouraged. As a mandatory solution brief requirement, please
identify and provide:

       o      Known or forecasted subsystem and system weights, including
unmanned platforms and initial sensors. Algorithm only solutions do not have to
supply system weights if the plan is to use Government furnished video feed.

         o     Known or forecasted target Probability of Detection (Pd), false alarm
density, and time to process given the search area, target quantity, target type, and
search area.

       • Operational Relevance: Describe how the proposed
technology/engineering innovation addresses one (or more) of the specific Track 1
ATR for RAD and/or Track 2 RLAC problems.

       • Company Information: Provide a brief overview of your company,
including a summary of gross sales/revenue or current fundraising to date including

 CSO                       N0001424SC001                                        11
investors/funding rounds (if applicable). Provide a summary of product
commercialization history, roadmap, and go-to-market strategy.

       • Unnecessarily elaborate brochures or proposals are not desired.

        Companies may submit multiple solution briefs in response to the
solicitation if each submission represents a separate and distinct concept. Individual
solution briefs to individual Tracks may only address one concept. Submissions
must be submitted electronically as email attachments (pdf) as referenced in the
CSO solicitation.

        Solution Brief Evaluation/Notification: Evaluations of the Solution Briefs
will be issued via email notification on or about 29 February 2024.

        Phase III - Oral Presentation: ONR will select proposers for presentations
of their Solution Briefs. The purpose of the oral presentation is to provide an in-
person description of the slides and address how the proposed technology will affect
military applications. The date and time for oral presentations will be between 4-6
March 2024 throughout business hours. The location, and briefing format of the oral
presentations, if requested, will be provided at a later date via email notification.

         Oral Presentation Evaluation/Notification: Navy evaluations of the oral
presentations will be issued via email notification on or about 8 March 2024.
Participation in test and evaluation will be subsequently encouraged from those
Offerors whose proposed technologies have been identified through the
aforementioned email as still being of “particular value” to the Navy. Any Offeror
whose oral presentation was not identified as being of “particular value” to the Navy
is ineligible to participate in the test and evaluation.

       Phase IV – Test & Evaluation (T&E):

       Track 1 ATR for RAD Test & Evaluation

         Selected participants will be provided with coordination material and dates
for test and evaluation of ATR solutions. The test environment will be a
Government or Government selected facility airfield that will have the targets
supplied in the GFI package on the surface of the runway. Proposers can receive
imagery from output from the current Government solution or they can pilot their
own small, lightweight unmanned systems and sensors. Any equipment brought to
the test site must undergo all safety, test range (i.e. spectrum & flight clearance) and
environmental reviews for compliance.

       Track 2 RLAC Test & Evaluation

        The Government will provide a series of test opportunities for incremental
system of system demonstrations of commercial solutions for selected Track 2
participants. Any equipment brought to the test site must undergo all safety, test
range (i.e. spectrum & flight clearance) and environmental reviews for compliance.
 CSO                        N0001424SC001                                          12
              T&E Evaluation/Notification: Navy evaluations of the test and evaluation
      phase will be issued via email notification starting between 12 April 2024 to 17
      January 2025. A full proposal will be subsequently encouraged from those Offerors
      whose proposed technologies have been identified through the aforementioned
      email as still being of “particular value” to the Navy. Any Offeror whose solution
      was not identified as being of “particular value” to the Navy is ineligible to submit a
      full proposal.

              Phase V - Full Proposals: The T&E email notification will provide content
      and instructions on the submission of full proposals. The due date for receipt of Full
      Proposals is three weeks after notification of selection. The following documents
      with attachments comprise a complete proposal package: 1) Technical Proposal
      Template including the content requested via the above aforementioned email
      notification, 2) Non-proprietary Statement of Work, and 3) Cost Proposal for prime
      and all proposed subcontractors.

e. Format & Method for Submission

      1. Method of Submission – send phase submission requirements to both the Program
      Officer, and Agreements Specialist at the emails listed in section G. Federal
      Awarding Agency Contacts.

      2. Format for Full Proposal Submission – Notwithstanding the above direction for
      page limitations, proposer shall use the “Technical proposal template” and “Cost
      proposal template” (Excel) at the following ONR website link for Phase V
      proposal submission. Non-proprietary version of the Statement of Work must
      also be submitted. Do not put proprietary data or markings in or on the Statement
      of Work.
      https://www.nre.navy.mil/work-with-us/how-to-apply/submit-contract-proposal

      3. The cost proposal spreadsheet must be submitted in a Microsoft Excel compatible
      format. The Excel spreadsheet should be in a “useable condition” to aid the
      Government with its evaluation. The term “useable condition” indicates that the
      spreadsheet should visibly include and separately identify within each appropriate
      cell any and all inputs, formulas, calculations, etc. The Offeror should not provide
      “value only spreadsheets” similar to a hard copy.

3. Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) and System for Award Management (SAM) – All
offerors submitting proposals must:

a.    Be registered in the SAM prior to submission;
b.    Provide a valid unique entity identifier in its application; and
c.    Maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times
      during which it has an active Federal award or an application or proposal under
      consideration by a Federal awarding agency;

SAM may be accessed at https://www.sam.gov/SAM/

       CSO                        N0001424SC001                                         13
      A Federal awarding agency may not make a Federal award to an offeror until the offeror
      has complied with all applicable unique entity identifier and SAM requirements and, if
      an offeror has not fully complied with the requirements by the time the Federal awarding
      agency is ready to make a Federal award, the Federal awarding agency may determine
      that the offeror is not qualified to receive a Federal award and use that determination as a
      basis for making a Federal award to another offeror.

      4. Submission Dates and Times – See Section I.A.5 above, “Phases and Key Dates” for
      information.

      Submission of Late Proposals (Applicable to Solution Briefs and Full Proposals)

      Any Solution Brief, proposal, modification, or revision, that is received at the designated
      Government office after the exact time specified for receipt of proposals is “late” and will not be
      considered unless it is received before award is made, the contracting officer determines that
      accepting the late proposal would not unduly delay the acquisition and

                     (a) If it was transmitted through an electronic commerce method authorized by the
                         announcement, it was received at the initial point of entry to the Government
                         infrastructure not later than 5:00 p.m. one working day prior to the date specified
                         for receipt of proposals; or

                     (b) There is acceptable evidence to establish that it was received at the Government
                         installation designated for receipt of proposals and was under the Government’s
                         control prior to the time set for receipt of proposals; or

                     (c) It was the only proposal received.

      However, a late modification of an otherwise timely and successful proposal that makes its terms
      more favorable to the Government will be considered at any time it is received and may be accepted.

      Acceptable evidence to establish the time or receipt at the Government installation includes the
      time/date stamp of that installation on the proposal wrapper, other documentary evidence of receipt
      maintained by the installation, or oral testimony or statements of Government personnel.

      If an emergency or unanticipated event interrupts normal Government processes so that proposals
      cannot be received at the Government office designated for receipt of proposals by the exact time
      specified in the announcement, and urgent Government requirements preclude amendment of the
      announcement closing date, the time specified for receipt of proposals will be deemed to be extend to
      the same time of day specified in the announcement on the first work day on which normal
      Government processes resume.

      All applicants will receive a notification email advising if their proposal has been selected or not
      selected for recommendation for award.

D. Application Review Information
1. Criteria

              CSO                         N0001424SC001                                         14
a. The primary basis for selecting proposals for acceptance will be technical merit,
operational relevance and funds availability. To the extent appropriate, cost realism and
reasonableness may also be considered when selecting proposals. However, technical
and operational relevance are more important than overall price. ONR reserves the right
to request and require any additional information and documentation after it makes the
type of award instrument determination. ONR reserves the right to remove Offerors from
award consideration when the parties fail to reach agreement on award terms, conditions,
and cost/price within a reasonable time, or when the Offeror fails to timely provide
requested or required additional information.

b. The following discusses the sequential order and criteria for each phase. One must be
notified of successful previous phase completion prior to invitation and participation of next
phase. Successful selection in a particular phase does not guarantee movement to next phase
unless notified.

       1.      Phase I Criteria: Industry Day registrants are reviewed for UEI/SAM
       registration, and contacted via email for download of Track 1 and/or Track 2
       Government Furnished Information (GFI) package(s) via box.com. Participants
       must enable box.com on their institutional systems in order to receive the GFI
       package(s). While physical or virtual participation is not mandated for the specified
       meeting, SAM registration and Industry Day registration is required.

       2.     Phase II Criteria: Solution Briefs will be received in Phase II and selected by
       a review panel for an in-person brief based on the following technical and
       operational evaluation criteria.

       Technical and Operational Evaluation criteria for Phase II Solution Brief evaluation
       is provided for each Track.

       a. Phase II Technical and Operational Criteria for Track 1 (a) ATR for RAD
       i. Technical Criteria for Track 1a
           o Able to meet GFI Package Criteria for Track 1a.
           o Able to process sensor data in real-time (not post mission analysis for
             detection and identification).
           o Able to be installed on embedded hardware.
           o Able to adapt or interface with other sensing and cooperative autonomy
             capabilities.
           o Preferred ability to retrain on-site.
           o Preference for capabilities that can transition from prototype to low rate
             production in two years.
           o Technical maturity of the technology/engineering innovation.

       ii. Operational Criteria for Track 1a
            o Provides a capability improvement for the specific problems described.
            o Operational impact in the relevant environment and impact to warfighter
              performance.
        CSO                        N0001424SC001                                          15
b. Phase II Technical and Operational Criteria for Track 1 (b) ATR for RAD
i. Technical Criteria for Track 1b (sUAS, sensors & algorithms):
    o Able to meet GFI Package Criteria for Track 1b.
    o Able to process sensor data in real-time (not post mission analysis for
       detection and identification).
    o Able to be installed on embedded hardware.
   o Able to adapt or interface with other sensing and cooperative autonomy
     capabilities.
   o Preferred ability to retrain on-site.
   o Unmanned Platforms and sensors must meet Department of Defense small
     UAS standards and meet all pilot, safety and environmental standards for test
     & evaluation at a US Government facility.
   o Size, Weight and Power (SWAP), lower SWAP capabilities are preferred.
   o Preference for capabilities that can transition from prototype to low rate
     production in 2 years.
   o Technical maturity of the technology/engineering innovation.
ii. Operational Criteria for Track 1b
   o Provides a capability improvement for the specific problems described.
   o Operational impact in the relevant environment and impact to warfighter
     performance.


c. Phase II Technical & Operational Evaluation Criteria for Track 2: RLAC
 i. Phase II Technical Evaluation Criteria for Track 2
   o Able to meet GFI Package Criteria for Track 2.
   o Able to process sensor data in real-time (not post mission analysis for
     detection and identification).
   o Able to be installed on embedded hardware.
   o Able to adapt or interface with other sensing and cooperative autonomy
     capabilities.
   o Preferred ability to retrain on-site.
   o Unmanned Platforms and sensors must meet Department of Defense small
     UAS standards and meet all pilot, safety and environmental standards for test
     & evaluation at a US Government facility.
   o Size, Weight and Power (SWAP), lower SWAP capabilities are preferred.
   o Preference for capabilities that can transition from prototype to low rate
     production in 2 years.
   o Technical maturity of the technology/engineering innovation.

ii. Phase II Operational Evaluation Criteria for Track 2
   o Provides a capability improvement for the specific problems described.
   o Operational impact in the relevant environment and impact to warfighter
   performance.

 CSO                        N0001424SC001                                       16
          3.      Phase III Criteria: Oral presentation of Track 1a, 1b and 2 Solution Briefs
          will be in-person and apply the criteria below resulting in possible selection for the
          Phase IV Test & Evaluation. Results of the evaluation will be communicated via
          email.

          All of Phase II Criteria applies, with additional Oral Presentation criteria of:
               o Ability of the presenter to communicate an understanding of the problems,
                 desired solutions and GFI package criteria.
               o Ability of the presenter to clearly explain the proposed technological
                 solution, maturity of the technology and how it responds to the operational
                 problem.

          4.      Phase IV Evaluation Criteria for Test & Evaluation:

          For Track 1a, 1b and 2, all of Phase II technical and operational criteria apply along
          with the additional Test & Evaluation criteria of:

               o An analysis and comparison of the results from Phase IV Test & Evaluation
                 against the criteria presented in the Track 1a, 1b, and 2 GFI packages as
                 applicable.

          The Government will notify all proposers of test and evaluation results along with
          decisions for proposals via email.

          5.     Phase V Criteria: For Track 1a, 1b and 2, all of Phase II and IV technical and
          operational criteria apply.

2. Review and Selection Process

   a. Evaluation Panel

   Solution briefs, presentations, and Proposals submitted under this CSO will be protected
   from unauthorized disclosure. The cognizant Program Officer and other Government
   scientific experts will perform the evaluation of solution briefs and technical proposals.
   Restrictive notices notwithstanding, one or more support contractors may be utilized for
   administrative purposes or as subject-matter-expert technical consultants. However,
   proposal selection and award decisions are solely the responsibility of Government
   personnel. Each support contractor’s employee(s) having access to solution briefs,
   technical presentations, and proposals submitted in response to this CSO will be required
   to sign the ONR Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) for Contractor Support prior to
   receipt of any submissions. This NDA includes third-party beneficiary language giving
   the submitter of proprietary information a right of direct action against the contractor
   employee and/or his/her employer in the event that the NDA is violated.

   b. Recommendation for Award

   Proposals will not be evaluated against each other since they are not submitted in
           CSO                         N0001424SC001                                         17
        accordance with a common work statement. ONR’s intent is to review all proposals
        received as soon as possible after they arrive; however, proposals may be reviewed
        periodically for administrative reasons.

        The ultimate recommendation for award of proposals is made by ONR's
        scientific/technical community. Recommended proposals will then be forwarded to the
        ONR Contracts office. Any notification received from ONR that indicates that the
        Offeror's full proposal has been recommended does not ultimately guarantee an award will
        be made. This notice indicates that the proposal has been selected in accordance with the
        evaluation criteria stated above and has been sent to the Contracting Department to
        conduct cost analysis, determine the offeror's responsibility, to confirm whether funds are
        available, and to take other relevant steps necessary prior to making an award. When
        applicable, certain offerors may be required to demonstrate compliance/the ability to
        comply with enhanced cybersecurity requirements prior to award.

E. Federal Award Administration Information

     1. Federal Award Notices

    All applicants will receive a notification email advising if their proposal has been selected or
not selected for recommendation for award.

    Applicants whose proposals are recommended for award may be contacted by an
Agreements Specialist to discuss additional information required for award. This may include
representations and certifications, revised budgets or budget explanations, and/or other
information as applicable to the proposed award.

   The notification e-mail must not be regarded as an authorization to commit or expend funds.
The Government is not obligated to provide any funding until a Government Agreements
Officer, signs the award document.

   Only an award document signed by the Agreements Officer is the official go-ahead to
commence the prototype project.

   Office of Naval Research (ONR) award/modification documents are only available via the
Department of Defense (DoD) Electronic Document Access System (EDA) within the
Procurement Integrated Enterprise Environment (PIEE) (https://piee.eb.mil/piee-landing//).

     2. Administrative and National Policy Requirements

        a.     Applicable to All Awards

i.       Export Control:

   Offerors are responsible for ensuring compliance with all U.S. export control laws and
regulations, including the International Traffic in Arms Regulation (ITAR)(22 CFR Parts 120 -
130) and Export Administration Regulation (EAR) (15 CFR Parts 730 – 774), as applicable. In
some cases, developmental items funded by the Department of Defense are now included on the
                CSO                         N0001424SC001                                         18
 United States Munition List (USML) (22 CFR Part 121) and are therefore subject to ITAR
 jurisdiction. In other cases, items that were previously included on the USML have been moved
 to the EAR Commerce Control List (CCL). Offerors should address in their proposals whether
 ITAR or EAR restrictions apply to the work they are proposing to perform for ONR. The ITAR
 and EAR are available online at http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/ECFR?page=browse. Additional
 information regarding the President's Export Control Reform Initiative can be found at
 https://export.gov/ecr/index.asp.

     Offerors must comply with all U.S. export control laws and regulations, including the ITAR
 and EAR, in the performance of any award or agreement resulting from this CSO. Offerors
 shall be responsible for obtaining any required licenses or other approvals, or license
 exemptions or exceptions if applicable, for exports of hardware, technical data, and software
 (including deemed exports), or for the provision of technical assistance.

ii.    Security Classification:

    In order to facilitate intra-program collaboration and technology transfer, the Government will
attempt to enable technology developers to work at the unclassified level to the maximum extent
possible.

    If it is determined that access to classified information will be required during the performance
of an award, a Department of Defense (DD) Form 254 will be attached to the award, and Federal
security requirements will be incorporated into the Agreement.

iii.   Requirements for Operation and Procurement of Commercial Off the Shelf Unmanned
Aircraft Systems

           (a) Commercial Off-The-Shelf Unmanned Aircraft Systems (COTS UAS) may
           not be purchased pursuant to this contract or other transaction agreement for
           prototype until a Cyber Exception to Policy (ETP) is obtained by the cognizant ONR
           Program Officer.

           (b) Exception. A Cyber ETP is not required when the research is supported via
           a grant award AND it is unclassified and funded with either basic research funds (i.e.,
           6.1) or applied research funds (i.e., 6.2) and performed on campus by a university.
           For all other grants and assistance agreements, a Cyber ETP must be obtained prior
           to purchase and/or flight operations.

           (c) Notwithstanding (b) above, a Cyber ETP is required for all efforts (regardless of
           award or funding type) that involve interactions with military personnel, DoD
           property, or DoD facilities; work conducted by US Government laboratories,
           UARCs, or FFRDCs; or are Public Aircraft Operation (PAO), classified, or explore
           specific military utility. For these efforts, and depending on the UAS platform and
           Cyber Operating Environment, a Cyber ETP, FAA issued Certificate of
           Airworthiness or a NAVAIR Airworks Authority to Operate (ATO) must be
           obtained.


                CSO                        N0001424SC001                                         19
            (d) Prospective or current performers are required to notify the cognizant ONR
            Program Officer of any anticipated COTS UAS purchase that may be subject to
            exception at solution brief, presentation, proposal submission or award changes.
            Performers shall provide documentation specifying the details including the type of
            drone, effort, location, etc.

            (e) Performers will agree to cooperate and provide additional information as
            requested to support the cyber vulnerability assessment and other requirements
            identified above in (c).

            (f) Notwithstanding, procedures and requirements identified above, restrictions
            identified in Section 848 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
            2023, Pub. L. No. 116-92, 10 U.S.C 4871 note, as amended, continue to apply.
            Performers are notified that effective October 1, 2024 additional restrictions will
            apply to new awards, extensions or renewals of existing contracts

      iv.      Prohibition on certain telecommunications and video surveillance services or
equipment

   (a) Definitions. As used in this provision-Backhaul, covered telecommunications equipment or
       services, critical technology, interconnection arrangements, reasonable inquiry, roaming,
       and substantial or essential component have the meanings provided in the clause 52.204–
       25, Prohibition on Contracting for Certain Telecommunications and Video Surveillance
       Services or Equipment.

   (b) Prohibition.

      (1) Section 889(a)(1)(A) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for
          Fiscal Year 2019 (Pub. L. 115–232) prohibits the head of an executive agency on or
          after August 13, 2019, from procuring or obtaining, or extending or renewing a contract
          to procure or obtain, any equipment, system, or service that uses covered
          telecommunications equipment or services as a substantial or essential component of
          any system, or as critical technology as part of any system. Nothing in the prohibition
          shall be construed to—

               (i) Prohibit the head of an executive agency from procuring with an entity to
      provide a service that connects to the facilities of a third-party, such as backhaul,
      roaming, or interconnection arrangements; or
               (ii) Cover telecommunications equipment that cannot route or redirect user data
      traffic or cannot permit visibility into any user data or packets that such equipment
      transmits or otherwise handles.

       (2) Section 889(a)(1)(B) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for
 Fiscal Year 2019 (Pub. L. 115–232) prohibits the head of an executive agency on or after
 August 13, 2020, from entering into a contract or extending or renewing a contract with an
 entity that uses any equipment, system, or service that uses covered telecommunications
 equipment or services as a substantial or essential component of any system, or as critical
 technology as part of any system. This prohibition applies to the use of covered
                CSO                        N0001424SC001                                          20
  telecommunications equipment or services, regardless of whether that use is in performance of
  work under a Federal contract. Nothing in the prohibition shall be construed to—

            (i) Prohibit the head of an executive agency from procuring with an entity to
       provide a service that connects to the facilities of a third-party, such as backhaul,
       roaming, or interconnection arrangements; or

             (ii) Cover telecommunications equipment that cannot route or redirect user data
       traffic or cannot permit visibility into any user data or packets that such equipment
       transmits or otherwise handles.

(c) Procedures. The Offeror shall review the list of excluded parties in the System for Award
Management (SAM) (https://www.sam.gov) for entities excluded from receiving federal awards
for ‘‘covered telecommunications equipment or services.’’

(d) Representations. The Offeror represents that—

       (1) It ☐ will, ☐ will not provide covered telecommunications equipment or services to the

                Government in the performance of any contract, subcontract or other contractual
                instrument resulting from this solicitation. The Offeror shall provide the
                additional disclosure information required at paragraph (e)(1) of this section if
                the Offeror responds ‘‘will’’ in paragraph (d)(1) of this section; and

       (2) After conducting a reasonable inquiry, for purposes of this representation, the Offeror

                represents that— It ☐ does, ☐ does not use covered telecommunications
                equipment or services, or use any equipment, system, or service that uses
                covered telecommunications equipment or services. The Offeror shall provide
                the additional disclosure information required at paragraph (e)(2) of this section
                if the Offeror responds ‘‘does’’ in paragraph (d)(2) of this section.

  (e) Disclosures. (1) Disclosure for the representation in paragraph (d)(1) of this provision. If
  the Offeror has responded ‘‘will’’ in the representation in paragraph (d)(1) of this provision,
  the Offeror shall provide the following information as part of the offer:

                        (i) For covered equipment—

         (A) The entity that produced the covered telecommunications equipment (include entity
             name, unique entity identifier, CAGE code, and whether the entity was the original
             equipment manufacturer (OEM) or a distributor, if known);

         (B) A description of all covered telecommunications equipment offered (include brand;
             model number, such as OEM number, manufacturer part number, or wholesaler
             number; and item description, as applicable); and

         (C) Explanation of the proposed use of covered telecommunications equipment and

                CSO                         N0001424SC001                                            21
            any factors relevant to determining if such use would be permissible under the
            prohibition in paragraph (b)(1) of this provision.

                      (ii) For covered services—

           (A) If the service is related to item maintenance: A description of all covered
               telecommunications services offered (include on the item being maintained:
               Brand; model number, such as OEM number, manufacturer part number, or
               wholesaler number; and item description, as applicable); or

           (B) If not associated with maintenance, the Product Service Code (PSC) of the service
               being provided; and explanation of the proposed use of covered
               telecommunications services and any factors relevant to determining if such use
               would be permissible under the prohibition in paragraph (b)(1) of this provision.

      (2) Disclosure for the representation in paragraph (d)(2) of this provision. If the Offeror
has responded ‘‘does’’ in the representation in paragraph (d)(2) of this provision, the Offeror
shall provide the following information as part of the offer:

       (i) For covered equipment—

             (A) The entity that produced the covered telecommunications equipment (include
                 entity name, unique entity identifier, CAGE code, and whether the entity was
                 the OEM or a distributor, if known);

             (B) A description of all covered telecommunications equipment offered (include
                 brand; model number, such as OEM number, manufacturer part number, or
                 wholesaler number; and item description, as applicable); and

             (C) Explanation of the proposed use of covered telecommunications equipment and
                 any factors relevant to determining if such use would be permissible under the
                 prohibition in paragraph (b)(2) of this provision.

       (ii) For covered services—

             (A) If the service is related to item maintenance: A description of all covered
                 telecommunications services offered (include on the item being maintained:
                 Brand; model number, such as OEM number, manufacturer part number, or
                 wholesaler number; and item description, as applicable); or

             (B) If not associated with maintenance, the PSC of the service being provided; and
                 explanation of the proposed use of covered telecommunications services and
                 any factors relevant to determining if such use would be permissible under the
                 prohibition in paragraph (b)(2) of this provision.

 v. Prohibition on funding a Confucius Institute Host


              CSO                         N0001424SC001                                             22
Per NDAA 2021 Section 1062, beginning October 1, 2024, DoD may not fund institutions of
higher education (as defined by 20 USC 1002) that host a Confucius Institute, other than
amounts provided directly to students as education assistance, unless a waiver is provided. A
Confucius Institute is defined as a cultural institute directly or indirectly funded by the
Government of the People’s Republic of China.

F. Federal Awarding Agency Contacts

   1. Communications

       a. All UNCLASSIFIED communications shall be submitted via e-mail to the Technical
       Point of Contract (POC) with a copy to the designated Business POC, as designated below.

       b. Comments or questions submitted should be concise and to the point, eliminating any
       unnecessary verbiage. In addition, the relevant part and paragraph of the CSO should be
       referenced. Questions submitted within two (2) weeks prior to a deadline may not be
       answered, and the due date for submission of the full proposal will not be extended.

   2. Questions of a technical nature should be submitted to:

       Point of Contact Name: Jean McGovern, and Patrick Smith
       Point of Contact Occupation Title: Program Officer/Program Contract Support
       Address: Office of Naval Research
       ONR Code 32
       One Liberty Center
       875 N. Randolph Street
       Arlington, VA 22203-1995
       Email Address: Jean McGovern, jean.m.mcgovern.civ@us.navy.mil and Patrick Smith,
       patrick.j.smith5.ctr@us.navy.mil

    3. Questions of a business nature, regarding proposal submissions, or suggestions for
       improvement should be submitted to:

       Point of Contact Name: Derek Petersen
       Point of Contact Occupation Title: Agreements Specialist
       Address: Office of Naval Research
       ONR Code 252
       One Liberty Center
       875 N. Randolph Street
       Arlington, VA 22203-1995
       Email Address: derek.w.petersen.civ@us.navy.mil




               CSO                        N0001424SC001                                         23
