                                  Department of Defense
                                 DIRECTIVE

                                                                              NUMBER 1338.05
                                                                                 January 12, 2005
                                                            Certified Current as of April 23, 2007

                                                                                      USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Armed Forces Clothing Monetary Allowance Policy

References: (a) DoD Directive 1338.5, “Armed Forces Clothing Monetary Allowance Policy,”
                March 9, 1998 (hereby canceled)
            (b) Sections 418 and 419 of title 37, United States Code
            (c) Executive Order 10113, “Delegating the Authority of the President to Prescribe
                Clothing Allowances, and Cash Allowances in Lieu Thereof, for Enlisted Men
                in the Armed Forces,” February 24, 1950
            (d) DoD Instruction 1338.18, “Armed Forces Clothing Monetary Allowance
                Procedures,” January 7, 1998


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive reissues reference (a) to reflect current policy on the Armed Forces clothing
monetary allowances.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Military Departments.
The term “Military Services,” as used herein, refers to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and
the Marine Corps.


3. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:

   3.1. Under Section 418 of title 37, United States Code (reference (b)), and Executive Order
10113 (reference (c)), the Secretary of Defense, or the Secretary’s designee, may prescribe the
quantity and kind of clothing to be furnished annually to an enlisted member of the Military




                                                1
                                                                 DoDD 1338.05, January 12, 2005


Services, and may prescribe the amount of cash allowance to be paid to an enlisted member if
clothing is not so furnished.

    3.2. A uniform system of providing individual clothing be maintained for enlisted personnel
of the DoD Components. Quantities and items of individual clothing to be furnished shall be
prescribed by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned, or the Secretary’s designee.

    3.3. An initial clothing allowance for uniform clothing issue shall be furnished to each
enlistee when he or she first enlists in the concerned Military Service. This shall be the actual
required uniform items or a cash allowance for required items not issued.

     3.4. A basic cash clothing replacement allowance for uniform clothing shall be paid to each
enlisted member for the replacement of required items in the initial issue, as needed, after the
first 6 months of service through the remainder of the first 3 years of continuous active duty.
The basic cash clothing replacement allowance is 70 percent of the standard cash clothing
replacement allowance.

   3.5. A standard cash clothing replacement allowance for uniform clothing shall be paid to
each enlistee after 3 years of active duty.

     3.6. The cash replacement allowances for uniform items are intended to provide funds to
enlisted members for the replacement of military-unique items required for wear by the
respective Secretary of the Military Department. The allowances are based on an estimated wear
life of issued military-unique items. They are not intended to cover the cost of repair, dry
cleaning, or laundering of clothing.

    3.7. The basic and standard replacement allowances shall be based on current Defense
Logistics Agency (DLA) prices and the estimated useful wear life of required clothing. Items
not uniquely military, and exercise items issued primarily for use during initial training, shall be
excluded from the replacement allowance computations. Items not uniquely military represent
costs that may be incurred whether or not enlisted members were required to wear a military
uniform, such as non-military-unique underwear and towels.

     3.8. Enlisted personnel, on assignment to a tour of duty or attainment of a status that requires
the wearing of individual uniform clothing (other than special dress uniforms) different from
uniforms required for most enlisted personnel of the same Service, may be authorized a special
initial clothing allowance. It shall be authorized only once during any period of continuous
active duty.

      3.9. Enlisted personnel may be authorized a supplementary clothing allowance for uniform
items when they are assigned to duty for which they are required to have, for the performance of
such duty, additional quantities or special items of individual uniform clothing not normally
required for most enlisted personnel in the same Service. The supplementary clothing allowance
is in addition to any other clothing allowance the enlisted member may be authorized.




                                                  2
                                                                 DoDD 1338.05, January 12, 2005


     3.10. Enlisted personnel, regardless of where assigned, and officers assigned to a
permanent duty station outside the United States, under Section 419 of reference (b), who are
required by competent authority to wear civilian clothing for all or a substantial period of time in
the performance of official duty, may be paid a cash allowance for civilian clothing in the
amount the respective Secretary of the Military Department determines under DoD Instruction
1338.18 (reference (d)). Such clothing allowance is in addition to any uniform allowance to
which the Service member is otherwise entitled under reference (b).

     3.11. Special purpose individual clothing required for support of personnel in the
accomplishment of assigned duties shall be carried as organizational issue. Organizational
clothing includes special distinctive uniforms such as those required for Military Service bands.
These items are furnished under the issue-in-kind system. Therefore, no monetary credits or
payments are provided to such individuals for obtaining or replacing these items.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

   4.1. The Principle Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(PDUSD(P&R)), under the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall:

        4.1.1. Serve as the focal point on all matters concerning clothing monetary allowances
for the DoD Components.

         4.1.2. Issue and maintain reference (d) to provide procedures whereby enlisted personnel
of the DoD Components are furnished an initial issue of individual uniform clothing adequate for
the performance of their assigned duties, and a monetary allowance for the replacement of the
initial issue.

       4.1.3. Annually, not later than October 1st, in coordination with the Under Secretary of
Defense (Comptroller) (USD(C)), prescribe initial allowances against which initial issues are
debited and, thereafter, a cash replacement allowance for initial clothing replacement.

     4.2. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics shall
ensure that the Director, DLA, shall establish prices for individual items of clothing prescribed
for wear by the Secretaries of the Military Departments. By June 1st of each year, the Director,
DLA, shall provide a firm cost of clothing items to be issued in the next fiscal year to the Offices
of the PDUSD(P&R), the USD(C), and the Secretaries of the Military Departments. Under
normal circumstances, no price changes should occur during the fiscal year to which the clothing
allowances pertain.

      4.3. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall provide proposed annual changes to
their clothing allowances to the PDUSD(P&R) by July 1st before the beginning of the next fiscal
year, based on the DLA June 1st prices of items the Military Services have authorized in their
next fiscal year clothing bag.




                                                 3
                                               DoDD 1338.05, January 12, 2005



5. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




                                           4
