                           Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                        NUMBER 4715.02
                                                                            August 28, 2009
                                                    Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018

                                                                                 USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:     Regional Environmental Coordination

References: (a) DoD Instruction 4715.2, “DoD Regional Environmental Coordination,”
                May 3, 1996 (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Directive 4715.1E, “Environment, Safety, and Occupational Health
                (ESOH),” March 19, 2005
            (c) DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
                Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
            (d) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of
                the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office
                of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July
                13, 2018


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

   a. Reissues and renames Reference (a).

     b. Implements policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures under
Reference (b) for the establishment and operation of a program for regional environmental
coordination within the Department of Defense in accordance with the authority in Reference
(c).

   c. Establishes a framework for DoD Regional Environmental Coordinators (DoD RECs)
and Component RECs within the United States.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all
other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).
                                                                DoDI 4715.02, August 28, 2009



    b. Does not apply to safety and occupational health matters or to the civil works function
of the Department of the Army.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. In accordance with Reference (b), it is DoD policy to assign responsibilities and
prescribe procedures for the establishment and operation of a program for regional
environmental coordination for the Department of Defense.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 1.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 2.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility
for this instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in
accordance with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (d)).



9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective August 28, 2009.




                                                    Ashton B. Carter
                                                    Under Secretary of Defense
                                                    for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics

Enclosures
       1. Responsibilities
       2. Procedures
       Glossary




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           2
                                                                   DoDI 4715.02, August 28, 2009

                                        ENCLOSURE 1

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
ENVIRONMENT (ASD(EI&E)). The ASD(EI&E), under the authority, direction, and control
of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, shall provide
oversight of the regional environmental coordinator program.


2. PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY,
INSTALLATIONS, AND ENVIRONMENT (PDASD(EI&E)). The PDASD(EI&E), under the
authority, direction, and control of the ASD(EI&E), shall:

   a. Provide oversight of the DoD Components’ implementation of this Instruction.

   b. Develop DoD policy and guidance on issues raised in the REC process.

   c. Resolve conflicts elevated by the DoD Components.

   d. Appoint a single point of contact in the Office of the ASD(EI&E) to coordinate the REC
program with the DoD Components.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Serve as the DoD REC as follows:

       (1) The Secretary of the Army for Regions IV, V, VII, and VIII.

       (2) The Secretary of the Navy for Regions I, III, and IX.

       (3) The Secretary of the Air Force for Regions II, VI, and X.

   b. Designate a single Military Department representative in each assigned region to
coordinate the DoD REC program with OSD and the other DoD Components, as required.

   c. Provide all necessary support in the assigned regions.


4. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components, as
appropriate, shall:




Change 2, 08/31/2018                        3                                            ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DoDI 4715.02, August 28, 2009

   a. Designate a DoD Component REC in each region to coordinate environmental and
environmentally related matters in support of mission sustainment with the DoD RECs.

  b. Provide all necessary oversight, program direction, and support for their Component’s
RECs.


5. DoD RECs

   a. The DoD RECs shall:

      (1) Coordinate with DoD Components and other DoD RECs, as appropriate, to
accomplish their responsibilities.

     (2) Provide advice and assistance to DoD Components in their region through the DoD
Component RECs regarding:

           (a) Federal, regional, State, and local actions affecting multi-Component military
missions and operations conducted both on and off military property.

         (b) Proposed DoD programs and initiatives in relation to Federal, regional, and State
environmental programs and provide feedback regarding policy gaps or issues.

         (3) Monitor Federal, regional, State, and local legislative and regulatory proposals and
initiatives and determine the impacts, if any, on DoD missions and operations.

       (4) In coordination with appropriate DoD Component RECs, develop positions on
regional, State and, as appropriate, local legislative and regulatory proposals and initiatives and
ensure those positions are consistent with existing DoD policies, legal positions, and initiatives.

        (5) Engage appropriate regional, State, and local officials and staff to articulate a single
coordinated DoD position on legislative, regulatory, and policy proposals by regional, State, or
local agencies or other officials and discuss potentially acceptable solutions to issues consistent
with DoD positions.

       (6) Articulate and advocate approved DoD programs, policy, and initiatives in the
development of regional, State, and local legislation, regulation, policy, and other issues as
authorized.

       (7) Ensure that all communication with other DoD Components is handled through the
appropriate DoD Component RECs and that proper subject matter experts from DoD
Components are engaged where necessary.

        (8) Conduct meetings and outreach activities with DoD Components, Federal, regional,
State, and local officials, and other stakeholders, as necessary.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                              4                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDI 4715.02, August 28, 2009

        (9) Serve as a point of contact within their designated regions for non-DoD entities to
reach the Department of Defense on significant regional environmental and environmentally
related matters in support of mission sustainment.

        (10) Provide executive-level summaries on regional activities, success stories, and issues
related to their region, as appropriate.

       (11) Implement the communication plan.

   b. The DoD RECs shall not:

       (1) Issue policy.

     (2) Make unauthorized decisions or commitments for the Department of Defense or any
DoD Components.

       (3) Commit the resources of another DoD Component, without that Component’s prior
consent.

       (4) Negotiate or sign agreements or issue positions on environmental and
environmentally related matters in support of mission sustainment unless coordinated with all
DoD Components.


6. DoD COMPONENT RECs. In addition to the responsibilities in section 5 of this enclosure,
the DoD Component RECs shall:

    a. Monitor and strive for the consistent interpretation and application of DoD policies within
the region, and elevate issues of interest or those requiring DoD-wide attention to the DoD REC
with a copy to the DoD Component single representatives.

    b. Coordinate with the DoD REC of the DoD Component’s activities with Federal, regional,
State, and local agencies that may have a multi-Component impact.

   c. Ensure that all communication with Federal, regional, State, and local agencies involving
multi-Component activities is coordinated with the DoD REC.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            5                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDI 4715.02, August 28, 2009

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                        PROCEDURES


1. On matters covered by this Instruction, communications among the PDASD(EI&E), the DoD
Components, the DoD RECs, and the DoD Component RECs shall be in accordance with the
chain of command. For issues requiring immediate PDASD(EI&E) attention, the DoD REC
shall promptly notify the PDASD(EI&E) at the same time the DoD REC notifies the chain of
command.


2. For matters requiring a DoD position:

   a. The DoD REC shall:

        (1) Coordinate the proposed DoD position with that region’s DoD Component RECs as
well as other DoD RECs whose regions might have an interest in the issue.

        (2) Provide the proposed DoD position to the appropriate DoD Components along with
all coordination comments.

       (3) Coordinate, as appropriate, with established service steering committees, work
groups, and subject matter experts to develop proposed DoD positions regarding environmental
and environmentally related matters in support of mission sustainment.

       (4) Provide the consolidated views from the coordination to the PDASD(EI&E).

   b. The PDASD(EI&E) shall:

       (1) Provide a DoD position.

     (2) Communicate that position to all appropriate DoD Components and to the
DoD RECs.


3. For planning and reporting purposes, the DoD REC shall:

    a. Develop and implement an annual action plan based on DoD priorities and regional
actions and initiatives. The plan shall be calendar-year based and shall be briefed to the DoD
Components and PDASD(EI&E) at the annual DoD REC meeting.

   b. Implement a communication plan for DoD REC.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 4715.02, August 28, 2009

                                           GLOSSARY

                                          DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

Standard Federal Regions

       Region I: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont.

       Region II: New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands.

       Region III: Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West
Virginia.

       Region IV: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Tennessee.

       Region V: Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, Wisconsin.

       Region VI: Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Texas, Oklahoma.

       Region VII: Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska.

       Region VIII: Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, Wyoming.

      Region IX: Arizona, California, Hawaii, Nevada, American Samoa, Guam, Northern
Marianas, and any other Pacific islands).

       Region X: Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, Washington.

United States. The several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas, any other territory or possession of the United States,
and associated navigable waters, contiguous zones, and ocean waters of which the natural
resources are under the exclusive management authority of the United States.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             7                                  GLOSSARY
