                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 5000.68
                                                                               October 27, 2010

                                                                                           USD(P)

SUBJECT:      Security Force Assistance (SFA)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE.
   PURPOSE This Instruction establishes policy and assigns responsibilities regarding the
preparation of DoD personnel and operational planning for, as well as the conduct of, SFA
across the Department of Defense in accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD)
5111.1 (Reference (a)); Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (b)); titles 10 and
22 of the United States Code (References (c) and (d)), the guidance in Deputy Secretary of
Defense Memorandum (Reference (e)), and DoDDs 5132.03 and 3000.07 (References (f) and
(g)) as they pertain to SFA (see Glossary for definitions).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. The Department of Defense shall develop and maintain the capability within DoD general
purpose forces (GPF), special operations forces (SOF), and the civilian expeditionary workforce
(CEW) to conduct SFA activities in support of U.S. policy and in coordination with the relevant
U.S. Government (USG) departments or agencies (hereafter referred to collectively as “USG
agencies”).
                                                                   DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

    b. SFA shall encompass DoD efforts to support the professionalization and the sustainable
development of the capacity and capability of the foreign security forces and supporting
institutions of host countries, as well as international and regional security organizations. SFA
can occur across the range of military operations and spectrum of conflict as well as during all
phases of military operations. These efforts shall be conducted with, through, and by foreign
security forces.

    c. SFA activities shall be conducted primarily to assist host countries to defend against
internal and transnational threats to stability. However, the Department of Defense may also
conduct SFA to assist host countries to defend effectively against external threats; contribute to
coalition operations; or organize, train, equip, and advise another country’s security forces or
supporting institutions.

    d. SFA activities must directly increase the capacity or capability of a foreign security force
or their supporting institutions. The term “directly” is context-specific and serves to emphasize
that the clear and express intent of a SFA activity is the improvement of the capacity or
capability of a foreign security force or its supporting institutions.

   e. SFA contributes to the DoD role in USG security sector reform (SSR) initiatives.

    f. SFA is a subset of DoD overall security cooperation (SC) initiatives. Other SC activities,
such as bilateral meetings or civil affairs activities dedicated to the non-security sector, provide
valuable engagement opportunities between the United States and its partners, but fall outside the
scope of SFA.

   g. Security assistance programs are critical tools to fund and enable SFA activities, which
contribute to a host country’s defense.

   h. The portion of SFA oriented towards supporting a host country’s efforts to counter threats
from subversion, lawlessness, and insurgency, is a subset of foreign internal defense.

    i. SFA activities shall be prioritized using factors such as U.S. interests in the region, the
willingness and ability of partner nations to absorb U.S. assistance, and the level of risk for
partner nations to achieve their goals without U.S. assistance.

   j. The Department of Defense shall develop and maintain capabilities to:

       (1) Organize, train, equip, and advise foreign military forces.

         (2) Support the development of the capability and capacity of host-country defense
institutions and ministries.

       (3) Conduct SFA across all domains – air, land, maritime, and cyberspace – in both
permissive and contested environments, under steady-state or surge conditions.




                                                  2
                                                                  DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

   k. If required to support the development of the capability and capacity of non-defense
ministry security forces and their supporting institutions, and to the extent authorized by law, the
Department of Defense shall be prepared to apply the requisite task-organized capabilities to:

       (1) Support and coordinate with other USG agencies that are leading USG efforts to
support the development of the capability and capacity of non-defense ministry security forces
and their supporting institutions.

        (2) Advise and support the training of foreign paramilitary security forces – such as
border and coastal control forces, counterterrorist forces, and paramilitary or special police
forces – at all levels, in conjunction with other USG agencies.

       (3) Support the training of host-country civil police in individual and collective tasks in
contested environments when other USG-agencies’ trainers and advisors are unable to do so.
Coordinate the transition of responsibilities for such training and advisory duties to other USG
agencies as the security environment allows.

    l. The Department of Defense shall conduct SFA activities with the appropriate
combinations of SOF, GPF, CEW personnel (in accordance with DoDD 1404.10 (Reference
(h))), and contract personnel that are collectively capable of executing all missions and activities
required under these conditions:

       (1) Politically sensitive environments where an overt U.S. presence is unacceptable to
the host-country government.

      (2) Environments where a limited, overt U.S. presence is acceptable to the host-country
government.

       (3) Environments where a large-scale U.S. presence is considered necessary and
acceptable by the host-country government.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective upon its publication to the DoD Issuances
Website.




                                                 3
                             DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010



Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   Glossary




                         4
                                                                                            DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS



ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................6

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................7

     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)) ............................................7
     ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS/
        LOW-INTENSITY CONFLICT AND INTERDEPENDENT CAPABILITIES
        (ASD(SO/LIC&IC)) ............................................................................................................7
     DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR STRATEGY, PLANS, AND
        FORCES (DUSD(SPF)) ......................................................................................................8
     DIRECTOR, DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION AGENCY (DSCA) ..........................8
     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
        (USD(P&R)) ........................................................................................................................9
     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
        LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)) ................................................................................................9
     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)) .............................10
     DIRECTOR, COST ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAM EVALUATION (DCAPE).............10
     SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS......................................................11
     CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF ...............................................................12
     GEOGRAPHIC COMBATANT COMMANDERS ................................................................13
     COMMANDER, UNITED STATES SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND
        (CDRUSSOCOM) .............................................................................................................14
     COMMANDER, UNITED STATES JOINT FORCES COMMAND (CDRUSJFCOM) ......15

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................17

     ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................17
     DEFINITIONS.........................................................................................................................18




                                                                     5                                                    CONTENTS
                                                             DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” December 8,
      1999
(b)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,” November 30,
      2006
(c)   Title 10, United States Code
(d)   Title 22, United States Code
(e)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Security Force Assistance,” September 9,
      2008
(f)   DoD Directive 5132.03, “DoD Policy and Responsibilities Relating to Security
      Cooperation,” October 24, 2008
(g)   DoD Directive 3000.07, “Irregular Warfare (IW),” December 1, 2008
(h)   DoD Directive 1404.10, “DoD Civilian Expeditionary Workforce,” January 23, 2009
(i)   Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Guidance for Employment of the Force,” April 21,
      2008
(j)   DoD Directive 5105.65, “Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA),” October 31,
      2000
(k)   DoD Instruction 5132.13 “Staffing of Security Cooperation Organizations (SCOs) and the
      Selection and Training of Security Cooperation Personnel,” January 9, 2009
(l)   DoD Directive 5105.75, “Department of Defense Operations at U.S. Embassies,”
      December 21, 2007
(m)   DoD Instruction C-5105.81, “Implementing Instructions for DoD Operations at U.S.
      Embassies (U),” November 6, 2008
(n)   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3470.01, “Rapid Validation and
      Resourcing of the Joint Urgent Operational Needs (JOUNS) in the Year of Execution,”
      July 15, 2005
(o)   Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Global Force Management Implementation Guidance
      (GFMIG),” January 7, 2010
(p)   Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Global Force Management Allocation Plan
      (GFMAP),” March 4, 2010
(q)   Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Joint Center for International Security Force
      Assistance (JCISFA) Charter,” April 4, 2006
(r)   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3126.01, “Language and Regional
      Expertise Planning,” January 23, 2006




                                              6                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

                                       ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy shall:

  a. Establish policy on all SFA efforts in consultation with the Heads of the OSD and DoD
Components as appropriate.

    b. Establish SFA guidance on behalf of the Secretary of Defense and ensure that SFA
activities are aligned with DoD policy.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW
INTENSITY CONFLICT AND INTERDEPENDENT CAPABILITIES (ASD(SO/LIC&IC)).
The ASD(SO/LIC&IC), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), shall:

   a. Serve as the principal civilian advisor to the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P) for
SFA policy, capability development, and operational employment of DoD forces and DoD
Components engaged in SFA across all domains. Provide overall policy oversight to DoD SFA
capability-development efforts, including the prioritization of those efforts.

    b. Review, in support of capability-oversight responsibilities, the geographic Combatant
Commander (CCDR) annual forecast of SFA requirements (see paragraph 11.b. of this
enclosure) and provide the forecast to the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness (USD(P&R)); the Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation (DCAPE); and
the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans, and Forces (DUSD(SPF)) to ensure
the Department of Defense is able to meet the projected requirements adequately.

    c. Lead DoD efforts, in cooperation with other USG agencies, to develop guidance for
assessing the SFA needs of foreign security forces and supporting institutions.

   d. Lead DoD capability-development efforts and policy oversight for SFA activities
dedicated to the development of foreign defense ministries in accordance with Reference (h).

   e. Lead DoD efforts to collaborate with other USG agencies to develop SFA-related policy,
doctrine, and operating concepts.

    f. Co-lead, with the DCAPE and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the assessment of
Military Department capacities and capabilities for a range of campaign and contingency
scenarios involving SFA, including the geographic CCDR forecast of SFA requirements (see
paragraph 11.b. of this enclosure), in accordance with Reference (g).




                                               7                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

    g. Propose legislative changes as necessary to the Secretary of Defense to ensure appropriate
authorities exist to support SFA activities in accordance with DoD SFA objectives and goals.

    h. Coordinate the integration of DoD SFA capability-development efforts with similar
activities of relevant USG agencies and selected international partners.

    i. Provide oversight of the United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) in its
role as the joint proponent for SFA.


3. DUSD(SPF). The DUSD(SPF), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P),
shall:

  a. Prioritize DoD planning for SFA activities in accordance with Secretary of Defense
Memorandum (Reference (i)) and other relevant Secretary of Defense-approved documents.

   b. Identify and define future capabilities required for SFA activities and incorporate
guidance into appropriate strategic documents.

    c. Lead the development of comprehensive criteria and methodologies for assessing CCDR
progress in developing host-country security forces and supporting institutions as well as
international and regional security organizations.

    d. Ensure SFA is adequately addressed in the development of relevant defense planning
scenarios and force sufficiency studies in coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the DCAPE.


4. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION AGENCY (DSCA). The Director,
DSCA, under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), shall:

    a. Direct, administer, and provide DoD-wide program execution guidance, in accordance
with DoDD 5105.65 (Reference (j)), to the DoD Components and DoD representatives to U.S.
missions for the implementation of programs involving SFA activities that DSCA has been
assigned to fund and direct the execution of.

   b. Identify requirements, criteria, and procedures for the selection and training of security
cooperation organization (SCO) personnel and others who manage DSCA SFA-related programs
consistent with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5132.13 (Reference (k)).

   c. Ensure that the SCO training curriculum fully prepares personnel to manage security
cooperation programs that support SFA activities, in accordance with Reference (g).

   d. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components on SFA-related program
matters, in accordance with DoDD 5105.75 (Reference (l)).




                                                8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

    e. Support the USD(P) and the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
Logistics (USD(AT&L)) in developing sales policies and procedures for SFA-related defense
information, technology, and systems, as appropriate.

   f. In coordination with the Combatant Commands, establish appropriate agreements and
procedures for SCOs to provide guidance and oversight to SFA-related programs in accordance
with Reference (l) and DoDI C-5105.81 (Reference (m)).

    g. Establish and maintain a process to provide guidance and prioritization to the Military
Departments in the Foreign Military Sales case-execution phase of procurement of U.S. military
goods and services to ensure that urgent and emerging priorities for equipping and training
foreign security forces are addressed in a timely and fiscally responsible manner.


5. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R) shall:
    a. In coordination with the ASD(SO/LIC&IC); the Commander, USSOCOM
(CDRUSSOCOM); the Commander, United States Joint Forces Command (CDRUSJFCOM);
and the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and in collaboration with the Commandant of
the United States Coast Guard (USCG), establish policy and provide oversight for the training
and education of military and DoD civilian personnel to conduct SFA.

    b. In accordance with the guidance in Reference (g), establish policies to enable DoD-wide
tracking and managing of personnel with SFA-related skills, training, and experience, including
policies that support military and DoD civilian personnel in obtaining regional expertise and
provide for incentives for them to develop critical language and cultural skills.

    c. In coordination with the ASD(SO/LIC&IC), the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
Secretaries of the Military Departments, and the DCAPE, and in collaboration with the
Commandant, USCG, assess the readiness of military and DoD civilian personnel to conduct
SFA in support of the geographic CCDR annual forecast of SFA requirements (see paragraph
11.b. of this enclosure).

    d. In coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the CDRUSSOCOM, the
CDRUSJFCOM, and the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and in accordance with
Reference (g), assess the impact of sourcing SFA requirements on the overall readiness of SOF
and GPF to conduct non-SFA missions and propose personnel policies to mitigate any adverse
effects identified.

    e. In accordance with Reference (h), establish policies and procedures to govern and
facilitate the training and employment of DoD SFA civilian trainers and advisors, whether civil-
service or contractor personnel.




                                                9                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

6. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L) shall:

    a. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments and other relevant DoD
Component Heads, include in Defense Acquisition Management or Joint Urgent Operational
Need acquisition programs of record, as well as in rapid acquisition and technology-development
efforts, SFA capabilities that are validated by the Joint Requirements Oversight Council and in
compliance with the Joint Capabilities Integration Development System and CJCS Instruction
(CJCSI) 3470.01 (Reference (n)).

    b. Establish policies and procedures for the research, development, procurement, and
sustainment of materiel solutions for SFA activities and tasks identified in strategic guidance.

   c. Identify sustainable technologies available through the Department of Defense, the USG,
and off-the-shelf private-sector programs that could bolster DoD SFA activities with host
countries, and direct them into an appropriate regimen of rapid procurement, demonstration,
experimentation, testing, and fielding.

    d. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other relevant DoD Component Heads, support SFA activities by
ensuring that standard and non-standard equipment needed by partner forces can be promptly
made available when appropriate.


7. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)). The USD(I) shall:

    a. Establish policies and procedures for SFA activities involving intelligence and
information partnerships.

    b. Support assessment of the future SFA demand by providing appropriate intelligence
forecasts in support of national and regional strategies and campaign plans generated in
accordance with Reference (i).


8. DCAPE. The DCAPE, shall:

    a. Co-lead, with the ASD(SO/LIC&IC) and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
assessment of Military Department capacity and capability for a range of campaign and
contingency scenarios involving SFA, including assessment of the geographic CCDR annual
forecast of SFA requirements (see paragraph 11.b. of this enclosure), in accordance with
Reference (g).

    b. Manage, in conjunction with the USD(AT&L), the ASD(SO/LIC&IC), and the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the development and use of appropriate analytical models, tools, and
data to support analysis of SFA requirements.




                                                10                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

9. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

    a. Develop, maintain, and institutionalize the capabilities of Service members and CEW
personnel to support DoD efforts to organize, train, equip, and advise foreign military forces and
relevant supporting institutions, including during periods of armed conflict, up to the host-
country military-department level in order to meet the geographic CCDR-forecasted annual SFA
requirements (see paragraph 11.b. of this enclosure).

       (1) Support DoD efforts to build the capacity and capability of ministries of defense.

       (2) Enhance, if required, the capability and capacity of partner countries’ non-defense
ministry security forces, in support of USG agencies.

        (3) Provide scalable capabilities to meet the requirements of all three conditions under
which SFA activities are conducted as described in paragraph 4.l. above the signature in this
Instruction.

    b. In coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, support the identification
of required joint SFA capabilities across all domains (e.g., air, land, maritime, and cyberspace)
and acquire both standard and non-standard equipment required to conduct SFA-related activities
on the tactical and operational levels.

    c. In coordination with the USD(P&R), establish personnel, training, education, and
reporting requirements for military and DoD civilian personnel to conduct SFA-related activities;
develop incentives for military and DoD civilian personnel to obtain critical language and
cultural skills appropriate to operations in key regions in support of Reference (g).

        (1) In conjunction with the irregular warfare (IW) annual assessment required by
Reference (g), report the readiness of military and civilian personnel with SFA-related skills,
training, education, and experience to meet requirements identified in DoD policy guidance and
CCDR theater strategies.

        (2) Identify and track individuals who have completed SFA-related training, education,
or experience in the Defense Readiness Reporting System with a relevant skill-designator
indicating their SFA qualifications.

   d. In coordination with the USD(AT&L), include geographic CCDR-validated U.S. military
SFA capability requirements in acquisition programs.

   e. Develop Military Department, Service-specific strategy, doctrine, training, education, and
proficiency standards for SFA capabilities.

   f. In coordination with the geographic CCDRs; the Director, DSCA; and the USD(P&R),
expand, standardize, and mandate training for SCO personnel.




                                                11                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

   g. Coordinate with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the CDRUSSOCOM, and the
CDRUSJFCOM in their efforts to develop global joint sourcing solutions that recommend the
most appropriate forces for validated SFA requirements to the Global Force Management Board.

  h. In support of Reference (h), provide pre-deployment training for all CEW personnel
mobilized to support SFA missions as required and when resourced.


10. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:

    a. Serve as the principal military advisor to the Secretary of Defense for SFA capability
development and operational employment of DoD forces and components engaged in SFA
activities. In conjunction with the ASD(SO/LIC&IC), provide oversight of DoD SFA capability-
development and employment efforts.

    b. In support of capability oversight responsibilities, review the geographic CCDR annual
forecast of SFA requirements (see paragraph 11.b. of this enclosure) and provide the forecast to
the Secretaries of the Military Departments, to ensure the Military Services are able to meet the
forecasted requirements adequately.

   c. Direct joint exercises, concept development, and experimentation to ensure the Military
Services and Combatant Commands are prepared to plan, conduct, and sustain campaigns
involving SFA activities.

    d. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the CDRUSSOCOM,
the CDRUSJFCOM, and the Director, Joint Center for International Security Force Assistance
(JCISFA), develop joint doctrine and future operating concepts for SFA and incorporate SFA-
related concepts into joint doctrine.

    e. In accordance with Secretary of Defense Memorandums (References (o) and (p)),
approve, through the Global Force Management Board process, global joint-sourcing solutions
recommended by the joint force providers for geographic CCDR-validated SFA requirements;
forward to the Secretary of Defense for approval as part of the Global Force Management
Allocation Plan.

    f. Incorporate an assessment of Military Service proficiency and readiness to conduct SFA
activities into the annual assessments of proficiency and readiness for IW as required by
Reference (g).

    g. Co-lead, with the DCAPE and the ASD(SO/LIC&IC), the assessment of Military
Department capacities and capabilities for a range of campaign and contingency scenarios
involving SFA, including the geographic CCDR annual forecast of SFA requirements (see
paragraph 11.b. of this enclosure), in accordance with Reference (g).




                                                12                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

    h. In coordination with the USD(P&R), include SCO tours on the Joint Duty Assignment
List to incentivize tour assignments and build proficiency in SFA.

    i. In coordination with the Director, DSCA, and the Secretaries of the Military Departments,
develop joint publications on SFA for incorporation into the joint professional military education
system.

    j. In conjunction with the DCAPE and the ASD(SO/LIC&IC), manage the development and
use of appropriate analytical models, tools, and data to support analysis of SFA.

    k. Lead the identification of required joint SFA capabilities across all domains (e.g., air,
land, maritime, and cyberspace).

   l. Provide continued oversight of JCISFA as a CJCS-controlled activity in accordance with
Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (q)).

    m. In coordination with the Secretary of the Army, the CDRUSSOCOM, the
CDRUSJFCOM, and the Director, JCISFA, establish and maintain processes and procedures to
maintain effective relationships between JCISFA and key DoD SFA stakeholders to support the
institutionalization of SFA.


11. GEOGRAPHIC CCDRs. The geographic CCDRs, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff as appropriate, shall:

    a. In coordination with the chiefs of mission and country teams in their respective areas of
responsibility (AORs) and the other Heads of the DoD Components:

       (1) Assess and prioritize the needs of foreign security forces and supporting institutions
in coordination with interagency partners and in accordance with Reference (i).

       (2) Incorporate SFA into theater plans, both in the context of campaign and contingency
plans and operational activities as delineated in Reference (i).

       (3) Conduct SFA within their AORs.

    b. Annually forecast and report to the ASD(SO/LIC&IC) SFA requirements for the
following year and to the end of the Future Years Defense Program. Include in such forecasts
training, language proficiency, regional expertise, and cultural awareness requirements for
personnel, including SCO personnel, who are executing and supporting SFA activities in their
respective AORs, in accordance with CJCSI 3126.01 (Reference (r)).

    c. Incorporate assessment of SFA activities, capabilities, and requirements, as appropriate,
into responses to current assessment taskings (e.g., comprehensive joint assessment) to facilitate
the preparation of SFA-related reports and assessments.




                                                 13                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

   d. Record in the Theater Security Cooperation Management Information System all
subordinate commands and DoD entities conducting SFA activities in their respective AORs.

    e. Integrate staff and unit collective training for SFA activities into training programs. In
accordance with References (g) and (k), ensure that training requirements for personnel assigned
to SCOs fully prepare SCO personnel with the skills needed to facilitate and conduct SFA
activities.


12. CDRUSSOCOM. The CDRUSSOCOM, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
as appropriate, shall:

   a. Serve as the joint proponent for SFA, and in this capacity shall:

       (1) In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the
CDRUSJFCOM, assist the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff by serving as lead for the
development of joint doctrine, training, and education relevant to SFA activities conducted
within a host country from the individual to the Service-level.

      (2) Lead the development of Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) tasks for SFA and the
mapping of those tasks to approved joint capability areas.

       (3) Collaborate with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the CDRUSJFCOM,
in coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the geographic CCDRs, to
develop global joint-sourcing solutions that recommend to the Global Force Management Board
the most appropriate forces for meeting geographic CCDR-validated SFA requirements under
the conditions in paragraph 4.l. above the signature of this Instruction.

        (4) Assist USD(P&R) efforts to identify and establish guidelines for skills, experience,
rank, training, education, and levels of expertise for Service members and career DoD civilian
and contractor personnel to conduct SFA activities.

        (5) Upon request from the geographic CCDRs, serve as a source of SFA expertise to
joint task forces or Combatant Command joint force headquarters.

    b. Support the CDRUSJFCOM, in coordination with the Director, JCISFA, to collect best
practices to support future concept and doctrine development.

     c. Incorporate an assessment of SOF proficiency and readiness to conduct SFA activities
into the annual assessments of SOF proficiency and readiness for IW as required by Reference
(g).

   d. In coordination with the CDRUSJFCOM, identify and explore new SFA concepts and
capabilities and integrate them into the joint concept development and experimentation program.




                                                14                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

13. CDRUSJFCOM. The CDRUSJFCOM, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as
appropriate, shall:

   a. Explore new SFA concepts and capabilities and integrate them into the joint concept
development and experimentation program, in coordination with the USD(AT&L), the
ASD(SO/LIC&IC), the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the CDRUSSOCOM.
Recommend potential solutions, including planning and assessments, to address SFA capability
and capacity gaps and process issues identified by the geographic CCDRs during concept
development and experimentation.

    b. In conjunction with the CDRUSSOCOM and the geographic CCDRs, through the ASD
SO/LIC&IC, identify potential solutions for enhancing interagency collaboration in SFA
activities and training.

   c. In conjunction with the CDRUSSOCOM and the geographic CCDRs, and in collaboration
with the Supreme Allied Commander Transformation, identify potential solutions for enhancing
multinational proficiency in SFA activities and training.

    d. Collaborate with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the CDRUSSOCOM, in
coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the geographic CCDRs, to
develop global joint-sourcing solutions that recommend to the Global Force Management Board
the most appropriate forces for meeting geographic CCDR-validated SFA requirements under
the conditions in paragraph 4.l. above the signature of this Instruction.

    e. In coordination with the CDRUSSOCOM, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and
the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and in collaboration with the Commandant, USCG:

       (1) Recommend, for Joint Requirements Oversight Council approval, changes to
doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, and facilities to
improve joint SFA capabilities.

       (2) Identify and disseminate DoD, interagency, and multinational SFA lessons learned
and best practices across the Department of Defense.

   f. Identify and recommend to the CDRUSSOCOM UJTL tasks for SFA.

   g. Support the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the identification of required joint
SFA capabilities across all domains (e.g., air, land, maritime, and cyberspace).

    h. Support the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the CDRUSSOCOM in the
development of joint SFA doctrine and joint SFA training and education standards for
individuals and units.

   i. Support the integration of individual and collective SFA training activities into joint
mission rehearsals, Combatant Command training programs, senior leader education and, as
required, Military Service training programs.



                                                 15                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010



   j. Provide modeling and simulation support to SFA exercises and experiments.

    k. In support of Reference (g), include an annual assessment of GPF proficiency and
readiness to conduct SFA in the annual assessment of Military Service GPF proficiency and
readiness for IW to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to inform and support the
development of the Chairman’s Annual Risk Assessment.




                                             16                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

                                       GLOSSARY

                     PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AOR            area of responsibility
ASD(SO/LIC&IC) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations/Low Intensity
               Conflict and Interdependent Capabilities

CCDR               Combatant Commander
CDRUSJFCOM         Commander, United States Joint Forces Command
CDRUSSOCOM         Commander, United States Special Operations Command
CEW                civilian expeditionary workforce
CJCS               Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
CJCSI              CJCS Instruction

DCAPE              Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
DoDD               DoD Directive
DoDI               DoD Instruction
DSCA               Defense Security Cooperation Agency
DUSD(SPF)          Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans, and Forces

GPF                general purpose forces

IW                 irregular warfare

JCISFA             Joint Center for International Security Force Assistance

SCO                security cooperation organization
SFA                security force assistance
SOF                special operations forces
SSR                security sector reform

UJTL               Universal Joint Task List
USCG               United States Coast Guard
USD(AT&L)          Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I)             Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)             Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)           Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USG                U.S. Government




                                             17                                 GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

foreign internal defense. Participation by civilian and military agencies of a government in any
of the action programs taken by another government or other designated organization to free and
protect its society from subversion, lawlessness, insurgency, terrorism, and other threats to its
security.

joint proponent. A Service, Combatant Command, or Joint Staff directorate assigned
coordinating authority to lead the collaborative development and integration of a joint capability
with specific responsibilities designated by the Secretary of Defense.

security assistance. A group of programs authorized by the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961, as amended, and the Arms Export Control Act of 1976, as amended, or other related
statutes by which the United States provides defense articles, military training, and other
defense-related services by grant, loan, credit, or cash sales in furtherance of national policies
and objectives.

security cooperation. Activities undertaken by the Department of Defense to encourage and
enable international partners to work with the United States to achieve strategic objectives.
Includes all DoD interactions with foreign defense and security establishments, including all
DoD-administered security assistance programs, that:

    Build defense and security relationships that promote specific U.S. security interests,
including all international armaments cooperation activities and security assistance activities.

   Develop allied and friendly military capabilities for self-defense and multinational
operations.

   Provide Service members with peacetime and contingency access to host nations.

security forces. Duly constituted military, paramilitary, police, and constabulary forces of a
government.

SFA. DoD activities that contribute to unified action by the USG to support the development of
the capacity and capability of foreign security forces and their supporting institutions.

SSR. The set of policies, plans, programs, and activities that a government undertakes to
improve the way it provides safety, security, and justice. The overall objective is to provide
these services in a way that promotes an effective and legitimate public service that is
transparent, accountable to civilian authority, and responsive to the needs of the public. From a
donor perspective, SSR is an umbrella term that might include integrated activities in support of
defense and armed forces reform; civilian management and oversight; justice, police, corrections,
and intelligence reform; national security planning and strategy support; border management;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; or reduction of armed violence. The DoD


                                                 18                                     GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 5000.68, October 27, 2010

primary role in SSR is supporting the reform, restructuring, or re-establishment of the armed
forces and the defense sector across the operational spectrum.

with, through, and by. Describes the process of interaction with foreign security forces that
initially involves training and assisting (interacting “with” the forces). The next step in the
process is advising, which may include advising in combat situations (acting “through” the
forces). The final phase is achieved when foreign security forces operate independently (act
“by” themselves).




                                                19                                    GLOSSARY
