                             Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                              NUMBER 5124.03
                                                                                  January 8, 2005
                                                            Certified Current as of April 23, 2007

                                                                                      USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Armed Forces Tax Council

References: (a) DoD Directive 5124.3, “Armed Forces Tax Council,” December 1,
                1988 (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD 5025.1-M, "Department of Defense Directives System Procedures,"
                March 2003


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

    1.1. This Directive reissues reference (a) and updates the membership, organization, and
responsibilities of the Armed Forces Tax Council.

    1.2. The Armed Forces Tax Council coordinates matters affecting Federal, State, local, and
foreign tax liabilities of members of the Armed Forces and the related obligations of the Military
Departments as employers. The term tax liabilities include employment tax liabilities.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military
Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred
to collectively as the “DoD Components”). The term "Military Services," as used herein, refers
to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.


3. ORGANIZATION

  3.1. The Armed Forces Tax Council shall be composed of an Executive Director, three
members from the OSD Staff, and one member from each Military Service.




                                                1
                                                                  DoDD 5124.03, January 8, 2005


    3.2. The Executive Director shall be designated by the Principal Deputy Under Secretary of
Defense (Personnel and Readiness) (PDUSD (P&R)). One Council member shall be designated
by each of the following officials: the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller (USD(C)), the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Reserve Affairs) (ASD(RA)), and the General Counsel of the
Department of Defense (GC, DoD). Council members from the Military Services shall be
designated by the Secretary of the Military Department concerned.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    4.1. The Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, under
the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall:

         4.1.1. Provide policy guidance and supervision of the Armed Forces Tax Council.

         4.1.2. Designate the Executive Director of the Armed Forces Tax Council.

   4.2. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs shall:

         4.2.1. Review Council matters for their effect on the Reserve components and other
matters within the authorities and responsibilities assigned in the ASD(RA) charter.

         4.2.2. Designate a member of the Armed Forces Tax Council.

   4.3. The Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) shall:

         4.3.1. Review Council matters for their effect on fund control and payroll
administration and other matters within the authorities and responsibilities assigned in the
USD(C) charter.

         4.3.2. Designate a member of the Armed Forces Tax Council.

   4.4. The General Counsel of the Department of Defense shall:

         4.4.1. Review Council matters for their compliance with the law and other matters
within the authorities and responsibilities assigned in the GC, DoD charter.

         4.4.2. Designate a member of the Armed Forces Tax Council.

   4.5. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

       4.5.1. Review Council matters for consistency with Military Department regulations,
advise on the effects to the members of the Armed Forces and provide coordination as necessary.

        4.5.2. Designate members, one for each Military Service, as members of the Armed
Forces Tax Council.



                                                 2
                                                                     DoDD 5124.03, January 8, 2005



    4.6. The Armed Forces Tax Council shall:

           4.6.1. Coordinate all tax matters affecting the military including:

            4.6.1.1. Current and proposed DoD issuances authorized pursuant to DoD 5025.1-M
(reference (b)) and Military Department regulations.

             4.6.1.2. Requests for rulings and comments on regulations from the Department of
Defense to the Treasury Department, the Internal Revenue Service, and the State taxation
authorities.

         4.6.1.3. Legislative proposals that affect the Federal and State tax obligations of
members of the Armed Forces and related obligations of the Military Departments.

          4.6.1.4. Requests for interpretations of tax laws, regulations, and rulings requested by
DoD offices and Agencies.

              4.6.1.5. Advice on matters related to tax policy as it affects members of the Armed
Forces.
              4.6.1.6. Liaison with Federal, State, and local tax authorities by DoD representatives.

       4.6.2. Require concurrence from a majority of the Departments represented and a
majority of representatives from the OSD for final Council action on matters identified in
subparagraphs 4.5.1.1. through 4.5.1.5., above, subject to PDUSD (P&R) policy guidance and
supervision.

        4.6.3. Establish advisory groups, when necessary, to coordinate military tax matters in
specific areas of Council responsibility. The Advisory groups shall include one member from
the OSD appointed by the Executive Director of the Council and one member from each Military
Service appointed by the Council member representing that Service.

    4.7. The Executive Director, Armed Forces Tax Council shall execute Council actions and
shall function as the principal advisor on all Council matters. In addition, the Executive Director
shall:

       4.7.1. Act independently on behalf of the Council on preliminary, routine, or minor
Council matters not requiring concurrence from a majority, as indicated in subparagraph 4.5.2.,
above.

           4.7.2. Ensure coordination of military tax matters with external DoD Agencies and
offices.

     4.7.3. Coordinate and assign responsibilities for specific Council matters among Council
members.




                                                    3
                                                                DoDD 5124.03, January 8, 2005


       4.7.4. Perform other functions established by a majority of the Council.

   4.8. The Council Members shall:

       4.8.1. Ensure coordination of Council matters within the offices they represent.

       4.8.2. Recommend to the Council appropriate action in all matters pertaining to military
tax matters.

       4.8.3. Perform duties on behalf of the Council as may be assigned by the Executive
Director.


5. RELATIONSHIPS

   5.1. The Council shall operate under the policy guidance of the PDUSD(P&R). Questions of
law shall be submitted to the GC, DoD, or other appropriate authority for resolution.

   5.2. In areas of mutual interest or responsibility, representatives of the other DoD
Components, Executive Departments, and governmental agencies may be invited by the
Executive Director to participate in Council activities.


6. ADMINISTRATION

The Council shall meet at the call of the Executive Director. Secretarial and clerical assistance
shall be furnished by the PDUSD (P&R). Members of the Council shall be advised promptly of
all actions taken on behalf of the Council. A report of Council action shall be submitted to the
PDUSD(P&R); the ASD(RA); the USD(C); the GC, DoD; and each Military Department at least
annually.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




                                                4
