                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 4180.01
                                                                                April 16, 2014
                                                       Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018

                                                                                     USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:     DoD Energy Policy

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

   a. Establishes policy and guidance and assigns responsibilities for energy planning, use, and
management for the DoD.

   b. Provides for the establishment of DoD energy boards and councils.

   c. Incorporates, as appropriate, and cancels DoD Instruction (DoDI) 4170.10
(Reference (a)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to
collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to enhance military capability, improve energy security and
resilience, and mitigate costs in its use and management of energy. To these ends, DoD will:

    a. Improve the energy performance of weapons systems, platforms, equipment, and
products, and their modifications; installations, including both enduring and non-enduring
locations; and military forces.

   b. Diversify and expand energy supplies and sources, including renewable energy sources
and alternative fuels.

   c. Ensure that energy analyses are included in DoD requirements, acquisition, and planning,
programming, budgeting, and execution (PPBE) processes.
                                                                   DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014



    d. Assess and manage energy-related risks to operations, training, and testing, to include
assets, supporting infrastructure, equipment, supplies, platforms, and personnel.

    e. Develop and acquire technologies that meet DoD energy needs and manage risks; utilize
appropriate resources and energy expertise in other governmental organizations and the private
sector.

   f. Educate and train personnel in valuing energy as a mission essential resource.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this directive to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (b)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective April 16, 2014.




                                                 Christine H. Fox
                                                 Acting Deputy Secretary of Defense


Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            2
                                                                             DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014

                                                ENCLOSURE 1

                                                REFERENCES


(a) DoD Instruction 4170.10, “Energy Management Policy,” August 8, 1991 (hereby
    cancelled)
(b) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
    of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(c) Title 10, United States Code
(d) DoD Directive 5134.15, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Operational Energy Plans and
    Programs (ASD(OEPP)),” May 17, 2011
(e) DoD Directive 3000.10, “Contingency Basing Outside the United States,” January 10,
    2013
(f) Joint Capabilities Integration Development System Manual, “Manual for the Operation of
    the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System,” current edition1
(g) DoD Instruction 4170.11, “Installation Energy Management,” December 11, 2009, as
    amended
(h) DoD Instruction 4140.25, “DoD Management Policy for Energy Commodities and Related
    Services,” June 25, 2015
(i) DoD Instruction 4120.24, “Defense Standardization Program (DSP),” July 13, 2011
(j) DoD Instruction 3020.41, “Operational Contract Support (OCS),” December 20, 2011, as
    amended
(k) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” December 8,
    1999
(l) DoD Directive 3020.40, “DoD Policy and Responsibilities for Critical Infrastructure,”
    January 14, 2010, as amended
(m) DoD Directive 3025.18, “Defense Support of Civil Authorities (DSCA),” December 29,
    2010, as amended
(n) DoD Instruction 7730.66, “Guidance for the Defense Readiness Reporting System
    (DRRS),” July 8, 2011
(o) DoD Directive 7045.14, “The Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE)
    Process,” January 25, 2013
(p) DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,” January 7, 2015,
    as amended
(q) Defense Acquisition University, “Defense Acquisition Guidebook,” current edition2
(r) DoD Directive 4120.11, “Standardization of Mobile Electric Power (MEP) Generating
    Sources,” April 13, 2004
(s) DoD Manual 8910.01, “DoD Information Collections Manual,” date varies by volume
(t) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3170.01H, “Joint Capabilities Integration
    and Development System,” January 10, 2012
(u) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3401.02B, “Force Readiness Reporting,”
    May 31, 2011

1
    Copies may be obtained from the Internet at https://www.intelink.gov/wiki/JCIDS_Manual
2
    Copies may be obtained from the Internet at https://dag.dau.mil/Pages/Default.aspx


Change 2, 08/31/2018                                     3                                   ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L):

   a. Establishes DoD energy policy.

    b. Establishes DoD energy boards and councils as necessary to support DoD energy policies,
plans, and programs.

    c. Oversees DoD energy planning, use, and management, and the implementation of this
directive.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
ENVIRONMENT (ASD(EI&E)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(AT&L), and with the ability to communicate views regarding operational energy plans and
programs and the operational energy strategy directly to the Secretary or Deputy Secretary
consistent with section 138c(c) of Title 10, United States Code (Reference (c)), the ASD(EI&E):

   a. Is the principal operational energy policy advisor to the Secretary of Defense.

   b. Provides oversight and implementing guidance related to operational energy strategy,
goals, initiatives, and budgetary matters in accordance with Reference (c) and DoD Directive
(DoDD) 5134.15 (Reference (d)).

   c. Develops operational energy-related policy for contingency basing and facilitates energy
improvements at contingency locations in accordance with DoDD 3000.10 (Reference (e)).

    d. Develops policy and guidelines and provides oversight for development, certification,
qualification, field demonstration, and ongoing purchases of alternative fuels for operational
platforms in accordance with Reference (c).

    e. Oversees operational energy research, development, testing, and evaluation programs;
collaborates with DoD Components, the private sector, and other governmental organizations for
identification and demonstration of operational energy technologies.

   f. Supports the CJCS in the requirements process regarding operational energy, in
accordance with the Operation of the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System
Manual (Reference (f)).

   g. Promotes operational energy-related issues, programs, and accounts as an advisor to the
Defense Acquisition Board and other key acquisition bodies.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            4                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014



    h. Advises the CJCS and the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)) regarding the
role of energy in the DoD planning process across the full range of military operations.

    i. In conjunction with other DoD risk management and readiness programs, oversees
identification and mitigation of operational energy-related risks.

   j. Implements policies and provides guidance to the DoD Components for managing facility
energy resources and investments and serves as the primary adviser for facility energy matters in
accordance with DoDI 4170.11 (Reference (g)).

    k. Ensures cost-effective investments are made in facility infrastructure to reduce energy
demand, increase on-site distribution (including renewables), and enhance the power resiliency
of installations.

    l. In coordination with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
Security (ASD(HD&GS)), manages energy-related risks to support mitigation of commercial
electric grid challenges for DoD infrastructure and missions.

    m. Oversees facility energy technology programs. Identifies and supports the demonstration
of energy technologies to address installations needs.

   n. Collaborates with other governmental organizations and the private sector on facility
energy matters.


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR LOGISTICS AND MATERIEL
READINESS (ASD(L&MR)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L),
the ASD(L&MR):

   a. Provides guidance for management of energy commodities and related services in
accordance with DoDI 4140.25 (Reference (h)).

    b. Provides guidance for obtaining equipment, modifications, and products that improve
energy performance and mission effectiveness, are cost effective and, as appropriate, are capable
of using multiple energy sources.

   c. Facilitates the inclusion of energy considerations and performance incentives in contracts
and operational contract support.

    d. Provides guidance for assessment and management of energy-related risks to logistics
infrastructure and assets.

   e. Ensures logistics participation in alternative fuel qualification, certification, and field
demonstration activities.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                              5                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014



4. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION (ASD(A)). Under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), the ASD(A):

   a. Oversees acquisition of weapons systems, platforms, equipment, modifications, and
products that improve energy performance and mission effectiveness, are cost effective, and, as
appropriate, are capable of using multiple energy sources.

   b. Oversees energy-related policy and practices in defense acquisition workforce training
and education.


5. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING
(ASD(R&E)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), the ASD(R&E):

   a. In collaboration with the ASD(EI&E), oversees development of technologies that improve
energy performance and diversify energy supply for the DoD.

   b. Oversees standardization of energy-related equipment and technologies for the DoD in
accordance with DoDI 4120.24 (Reference (i)).


6. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY (DLA). Under the authority, direction, and
control of the USD(AT&L) through the ASD(L&MR), the Director, DLA:

   a. Manages energy commodities and related services in accordance with Reference (h).

   b. Procures equipment and products that, in support of mission requirements, improve
energy performance, are cost effective, and, as appropriate, are capable of using multiple energy
sources.

   c. Conducts assessments and manages energy-related risks to DLA infrastructure and assets.

    d. Provides energy expertise to support qualification and certification of alternative fuels and
field demonstration activities.


7. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE PROCUREMENT AND ACQUISITION POLICY (DPAP). Under
the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), in accordance with DoDI 3020.41
(Reference (j)), the Director, DPAP, oversees the inclusion of energy considerations and
performance incentives in policy, guidance, contracts, and operational contract support.


8. USD(P). The USD(P):




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014

   a. Provides regional and functional policy guidance and oversight as necessary for
implementation of this directive, in accordance with DoDD 5111.1 (Reference (k)).

    b. In coordination with the USD(AT&L) and the Director of Cost Assessment and Program
Evaluation (DCAPE), facilitates development of energy analysis and integration of insights from
the analysis into defense planning and programming considerations.

   c. Ensures assessments and management of energy-related mission risks for Homeland
Defense and Defense Support of Civil Authorities activities.


9. ASD(HD&GS). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), the
ASD(HD&GS):

    a. Oversees assessment and implementation of energy-related risk management for the
Defense Critical Infrastructure Program (DCIP), Defense continuity programs, mission
assurance, and other ASD(HD&GS) mission areas.

   b. In coordination with the ASD(EI&E), promotes collaboration between components of the
DoD and non-DoD government and private sector entities on restoration and resilience of
commercial energy infrastructure upon which DoD relies to reduce mission risk.

   c. Coordinates identification of key energy-related mission dependencies and capabilities
with the ASD(EI&E) through the DCIP in accordance with DoDD 3020.40 (Reference (l)).

  d. Coordinates requests from civil authorities for energy-related support in accordance with
DoDD 3025.18 (Reference (m)).


10. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R):

   a. Oversees energy-related readiness reporting in accordance with DoDI 7730.66
(Reference (n)).

    b. Ensures DoD personnel are educated and trained in valuing energy as a mission essential
resource.


11. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). The USD(C)/CFO updates and
maintains financial policy and guidance for energy-related activities as needed.


12. DCAPE. The DCAPE:




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           7                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014

   a. Provides programming guidance for implementation of this directive.

   b. Supports the use of energy analyses in DoD requirements, acquisition, and PPBE
processes in accordance with DoDD 7045.14 (Reference (o)).

    c. Guides and assesses the Fully Burdened Cost of Energy in analyses of alternatives
conducted for all developmental DoD systems with end items that create a demand for energy in
the battlespace, in accordance with DoDI 5000.02 (Reference (p)), and the Defense Acquisition
Guidebook (Reference (q)).


13. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

    a. Develop and implement doctrine, guidance, and strategies that are consistent with this
directive and its implementing instructions.

   b. Develop, acquire, and deploy weapons systems, platforms, equipment, modifications, and
products; installations, including enduring and non-enduring locations; and operating units that:

       (1) Improve energy performance and mission effectiveness.

       (2) Are cost effective.

       (3) As appropriate, are capable of using multiple energy sources.

   c. Include energy considerations and performance incentives in contracts and operational
contract support.

   d. Use the DoD standard family of mobile electric power generating sources, in accordance
with DoDD 4120.11 (Reference (r)).

    e. Measure energy consumption, account for energy-related programs, and provide this
information to OSD as directed by the USD(AT&L) in accordance with the procedures of DoD
Manual 8910.01 (Reference (s)).

   f. Integrate energy analyses into their department’s requirements, acquisition, and PPBE
processes.

   g. Incorporate modeling and simulation tools as appropriate to analyze system energy
demand and logistics supportability in the requirements, acquisition, and force planning
processes.

    h. Support joint planning that includes energy considerations and energy supportability
analyses across the full range of military operations, from engagement and security cooperation
to major operations and campaigns.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014



    i. Implement assessments and management of energy-related risks to infrastructure and
assets to improve mission assurance and energy security. Conduct periodic evaluations of the
vulnerability of basic mission requirements to energy disruptions, in accordance with
Reference (g).

    j. Develop and acquire technologies that meet DoD energy needs and manage risk. Use
appropriate resources and energy expertise from other governmental organizations and the
private sector.

   k. Educate and train personnel in valuing energy as a mission essential resource; develop a
workforce with skills needed to manage energy and reduce risks; and promote non-materiel and
behavior-based solutions.


14. CJCS. The CJCS:

   a. Develops doctrine and implements guidance that are consistent with this directive and its
implementing instructions.

    b. Oversees and conducts energy analyses in the requirements process and ensures
incorporation of modeling and simulation tools as appropriate to analyze system energy demand
and logistics supportability, in accordance with Reference (f) and CJCS Instruction (CJCSI)
3170.01 (Reference (t)).

    c. Ensures joint planning includes energy considerations and energy supportability analyses
across the full range of military operations, from engagement and security cooperation to major
operations and campaigns.

    d. Monitors energy-related mission assessments and information for planning, readiness, and
risk assessment purposes in accordance with CJCSI 3401.02B (Reference (u)).

   e. Ensures that joint exercises and wargames incorporate and assess the Joint Force’s energy
demand and logistics supportability.

   f. Ensures education and training include energy-related lessons learned from military
operations and exercises.


15. COMBATANT COMMANDERS (CCDRs). The CCDRs:

    a. Incorporate guidance and analyses in Combatant Command planning to address energy
risks and opportunities across the full range of military operations, from engagement and security
cooperation to major operations and campaigns.

   b. Assess energy-related operational risks and identify associated capability gaps.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            9                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014



   c. Ensure that joint training and exercises improve the Joint Force’s tactics, techniques, and
procedures for the delivery and use of energy.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            10                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 4180.01, April 16, 2014

                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


 ASD(A)     Assistant Secretary of Defense for Acquisition
 ASD(EI&E)  Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations, and Environment
 ASD(HD&GS) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
            Security
 ASD(L&MR)  Assistant Secretary of Defense for Logistics and Materiel Readiness
 ASD(R&E)   Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering

 CCDR              Combatant Commander
 CJCS              Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
 CJCSI             Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction

 DCAPE             Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
 DCIP              Defense Critical Infrastructure Program
 DLA               Defense Logistics Agency
 DoDD              DoD directive
 DoDI              DoD instruction
 DPAP              Defense Procurement and Acquisition Policy

 PPBE              planning, programming, budgeting, and execution

 USD(AT&L)         Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
 USD(C)/CFO        Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                   Department of Defense
 USD(P)            Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
 USD(P&R)          Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONSO

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

energy performance. The degree to which the DoD achieves missions, functions, or goals for the
amount of energy consumed.

energy security. Defined in section 2924(3) of Reference (c).

facility energy. The energy required to power fixed installations and non-tactical vehicles. This
includes energy consumed from the electric grid and on-site installation energy sources.

operational energy. Defined in section 2924(5) of Reference (d).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             11                                 GLOSSARY
