                              Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                              NUMBER 1340.20
                                                                                     July 14, 2003
                                                             Certified Current as of May 31, 2007

                                                                                          GC, DoD


SUBJECT: Settling Personnel and General Claims and Processing Advance Decision Requests

References: (a) Section 3702 of title 31, United States Code
            (b) Section 2575 of title 10, United States Code
            (c) Section 2771 of title 10, United States Code
            (d) Section 420 of title 24, United States Code
            (e) through (i), see enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE

This Directive establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for settling personnel and general
claims under references (a) through (h) and for processing requests for an advance decision
under reference (i).


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

This Directive applies to:

     2.1. The Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as "the
DoD Components").

     2.2. The Coast Guard, when it is not operating as a Service in the Navy under agreement
with the Department of Homeland Security, and the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health
Service (PHS) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), under
agreements with the Departments of Health and Human Services and Commerce (hereafter
referred to collectively as "the non-DoD Components").
                                                                     DoDD 1340.20, July 14, 2003


3. DEFINITIONS

The terms used in this Directive are defined at enclosure 2.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:

     4.1. The claim settlement and advance decision authorities that, by statute or delegation, are
vested in the Department of Defense or the Secretary of Defense shall be exercised by the
officials designated in this Directive. Enclosure 3 describes the claims included under these
functional authorities.

     4.2. Claims shall be settled and advance decisions shall be rendered in accordance with
pertinent statutes and regulations, and after consideration of other relevant authorities.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

     5.1. The General Counsel of the Department of Defense shall:

          5.1.1. Settle claims that the Secretary of Defense is authorized to settle under
references (a) through (h).

           5.1.2. Consider, and grant or deny, a request under reference (a) to waive the time
limit for submitting certain claims.

          5.1.3. Render advance decisions under reference (i) that the Secretary of Defense is
authorized to render, and oversee the submission of requests for an advance decision arising
from the activity of a DoD Component that are addressed to officials outside the Department of
Defense.

          5.1.4. Develop overall claim settlement and advance decision policies; and promulgate
procedures for settling claims, processing requests for an advance decision (including overseeing
the submission of requests for an advance decision arising from the activity of a DoD
Component that are addressed to officials outside the Department of Defense), and rendering
advance decisions. Procedures for settling claims shall include an initial determination process
and a process to appeal an initial determination.

     5.2. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

          5.2.1. Establish procedures within their organization for processing claims and for
submitting requests for an advance decision arising from it's activity in accordance with this
Directive and responsibilities promulgated under subparagraph 5.1.4.


                                                 2
                                                                    DoDD 1340.20, July 14, 2003


          5.2.2. Pay claims under references (c) and (h), if applicable.

         5.2.3. Ensure compliance with this Directive and policies and responsibilities
promulgated under subparagraph 5.1.4.

   5.3. The Heads of the Non-DoD Components, concerning claims arising from that
Component's activity under references (a), (b), (c), or (g), shall:

         5.3.1. Establish procedures within their organization for processing claims and for
submitting requests for an advance decision in accordance with this Directive and responsibilities
promulgated under subparagraph 5.1.4.

          5.3.2. Pay claims under reference (c), if applicable.


6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 3
  E1. References, continued
  E2. Definitions
  E3. Claims Description




                                                 3
                                                      DoDD 1340.20, July 14, 2003


                                 E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                              REFERENCES, continued


(e) Section 4712 of title 10, United States Code
(f) Section 9712 of title 10, United States Code
(g) Section 554 of title 37, United States Code
(h) Section 714 of title 32, United States Code
(i) Section 3529 of title 31, United States Code




                                           4
                                                                  ENCLOSURE 1
                                                          DoDD 1340.20, July 14, 2003


                                 E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                                    DEFINITIONS



E2.1. DEFINED TERMS

     E2.1.1. Armed Forces. The Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, and
the Coast Guard.

    E2.1.2. Claim. A demand for money or property under references (a) through (h).

     E2.1.3. Secretary Concerned. The Secretary of the Army, addressing matters
concerning the Army. The Secretary of the Navy, addressing matters concerning the
Navy, the Marine Corps, and the Coast Guard when it is operating as a Service in the
Navy. The Secretary of the Air Force, addressing matters concerning the Air Force. The
Secretary of Homeland Security, addressing matters concerning the Coast Guard when it
is not operating as a Service in the Navy. The Secretary of Health and Human Services,
addressing matters concerning the PHS. The Secretary of Commerce, addressing matters
concerning the NOAA.

     E2.1.4. Settlement. A claim and the amount due that is administratively determined
to be valid.

     E2.1.5. Uniformed Services. The Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps,
the Coast Guard, and the Commissioned Corps of the PHS and the NOAA.




                                           5
                                                                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                         DoDD 1340.20, July 14, 2003


                                          E3. ENCLOSURE 3

                                       CLAIMS DESCRIPTION



The Secretary of Defense is authorized to perform the claim settlement and advance
decision functions for claims under the following statutes:

      E3.1.1. Reference (a) concerning claims in general when there is no other
settlement authority specifically provided for by law.1

     E3.1.2. Reference (b) concerning the disposition of unclaimed personal property on
a military installation.

   E3.1.3. Reference (c) concerning the final settlement of accounts of deceased
members of the armed forces (but not the National Guard).2

     E3.1.4. References (d), (e), and (f) concerning the disposition of the effects of a
deceased person who was subject to military law at a place or command under the
jurisdiction of the Army or Air Force or of deceased residents of the Armed Forces
Retirement Home.

    E3.1.5. Reference (g), concerning the sale of personal property of members of the
Uniformed Services who are in a missing status.

   E3.1.6. Reference (h), concerning the final settlement of accounts of deceased
members of the National Guard.2




_______________
1
  This includes claims involving Uniformed Services members' pay, allowances, travel, transportation,
payment for unused accrued leave, retired pay, and survivor benefits, and claims for refunds by carriers for
amounts collected from them for loss or damage to property they transported at Government expense; also
included are other claims arising from the activity of a DoD Component. However, the Director of the
Office of Personnel Management performs these functions for claims involving civilian employees'
compensation and leave; and the Administrator of General Services performs these functions for claims
involving civilian employees' travel, transportation, and relocation expenses.

2
 Claims under this statute are actually settled under the authority in 31 U.S.C. 3702 (reference (a)),
because there is no specific settlement authority in the statute.

                                                      6
                                                                                          ENCLOSURE 3
