                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 4715.06
                                                                                   May 4, 2015
                                                        Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018

                                                                                       USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:      Environmental Compliance in the United States

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5134.01
(Reference (a)) and the guidance in DoDD 4715.1E (Reference (b)), this instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 4715.6 (Reference (c)) to establish policy, assign
responsibilities, and provide procedures for achieving and maintaining environmental
compliance in the United States.

   b. Designates DoD Components as lead agents to provide management of key DoD
environmental issues.

   c. Authorizes the publication of issuances to support the DoD environmental compliance
program in accordance with the guidance in DoDI 5025.01, DoDI 4715.27, and DoD Manual
4715.06 (References (d), (e), and (f)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction:

   a. Applies to:

        (1) OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD
Components”).

       (2) All DoD operations, activities, and military installations in the United States,
including government-owned, contractor-operated facilities, that are subject to environmental
compliance laws including, but not limited to, requirements of:
                                                                     DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

           (a) Sections 7401-7671(q) of Title 42, United States Code (U.S.C.), also known as
the Clean Air Act and referred to in this instruction as the “CAA” (Reference (g)).

            (b) Sections 1251-1387 of Title 33, U.S.C., also known as the Clean Water Act and
referred to in this instruction as the “CWA” (Reference (h)).

           (c) Sections 300f-300j-26 of Reference (g), also known as the Safe Drinking Water
Act and referred to in this instruction as the “SDWA.”

          (d) Sections 6901-6992(k) of Reference (g), also known as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act and referred to in this instruction as the “RCRA.”

          (e) Sections 2601-2692 of Title 15, U.S.C., also known as the “Toxic Substances
Control Act” (Reference (i)).

   b. Does not apply to:

        (1) Environmental compliance outside the United States. In the case of enduring
installations, this is addressed in DoDI 4715.05 (Reference (j)).

        (2) With the exception of the requirements in References (e) and (f), the operations of
U.S. military vessels and aircraft, at-sea training and testing activities, and off-installation
operational and training deployments. Such excepted operations, deployments, and training and
testing activities will be conducted in accordance with other DoD issuances and environmental
compliance requirements incorporated into environmental management annexes (e.g., Joint
Publication 4-04 (Reference (k))) and with all federal and State permits, consultation, and other
applicable environmental requirements.

       (3) The civil works function of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

       (4) Facilities and activities associated with the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program in
accordance with Executive Order (E.O.) 12344 (Reference (l)) and section 7158 of
Reference (g).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Environmental programs in the DoD achieve, maintain, and monitor compliance with all
applicable environmental requirements. This includes compliance with requirements in
statutorily mandated or authorized documents such as environmental permits, judicial decrees,
and consent or environmental compliance agreements.

   b. The DoD plan, program, and budget to achieve and maintain compliance with applicable
environmental requirements and DoD environmental compliance policy in accordance with DoD
7000.14-R (Reference (m)).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            2
                                                                        DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

   c. DoD generation and release of pollutants, and the adverse effects on human health and the
environment they cause, will be minimized.

   d. Pollution prevention is the preferred means for attaining compliance.

    e. DoD will implement the environmental management system (EMS) at appropriate
facilities to achieve DoD environmental goals in accordance with DoDI 4715.17 (Reference (n)).

    f. DoD will pay reasonable fees or service charges to State and local governments for
compliance costs or activities, except when the supporting legal office determines that such fees
are:

       (1) Discriminatory in either application or effect.

       (2) Used for a service denied to a federal agency.

      (3) Assessed in accordance with a statute in which federal sovereign immunity has not
been waived.

       (4) Disproportionate to the intended service or use.

       (5) Determined to be a State or local tax.

       (6) Determined not to meet the criteria contained in Enclosure 7 of this instruction.

   g. Internal and external compliance self-assessments are conducted at military installations.

    h. The use of DoD military installations for the storage or disposal of non-DoD-owned toxic
or hazardous materials is prohibited, except as allowed pursuant to section 2692 of Title 10,
U.S.C. (Reference (o)).

   i. All military and civilian DoD personnel will receive necessary and appropriate education
regarding applicable environmental requirements through training, career development, and
awareness programs

   j. Military installations located in unorganized U.S. territories that are not subject to a U.S.
environmental law of general application will nevertheless comply with the substantive
requirements of that law.

    k. U.S. military installations, as defined in the Glossary, must implement the reporting
requirements of chapter 116 of Reference (g), also known and referred to in this instruction as
the “Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA)” in accordance with
applicable E.O.s (e.g., E.O 13693 (Reference (p)) and DoD guidance.

    l. Reliance on class I and II ozone-depleting substances (ODS) will be eliminated under the
authority of Reference (p) and subpart 223.8 of the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation



Change 2, 08/31/2018                              3
                                                                    DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

Supplement (Reference (q)). Instructions for implementing Reference (p) are available at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/procurement/green/eo13423
_instructions.pdf.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. INFORMATION COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS. Environmental compliance programs
data requirements of the Environmental Management Information collection, referred to in
paragraph 5f of Enclosure 2 and Enclosure 6 of this instruction, have been assigned report
control number DD-AT&L(A,AR)2577 in accordance with the procedures in Volume 1 of DoD
Manual 8910.01 (Reference (r)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2 This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (s)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective May 4, 2015.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   4. Environmental Compliance Metrics
   5. Lead Agents for Environmental Compliance
   6. Environmental Compliance Data Requirements
   7. CWA Stormwater Reasonable Fee Determination Guidance
Glossary



Change 2, 08/31/2018                           4
                                                                                                    DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................6

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................8

     ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
        ENVIRONMENT (ASD(EI&E)).........................................................................................8
     DIRECTOR, DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY (DLA) .........................................................8
     USD(C)/CFO .............................................................................................................................9
     GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (GC DoD) ........................9
     DoD COMPONENT HEADS....................................................................................................9
     DoD COMPONENT HEADS DESIGNATED AS LEAD AGENTS .....................................10
     SECRETARY OF THE ARMY ..............................................................................................10

ENCLOSURE 3: PROCEDURES ................................................................................................11

     INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................11
     DoD COMPONENTS..............................................................................................................11
     DoD MILITARY INSTALLATIONS .....................................................................................12

ENCLOSURE 4: ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE METRICS ..........................................14

ENCLOSURE 5: LEAD AGENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE .......................15

ENCLOSURE 6: ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE DATA REQUIREMENTS ................17

ENCLOSURE 7: CWA STORMWATER REASONABLE FEE DETERMINATION
  GUIDANCE.............................................................................................................................24

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................26

     PART I: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................26
     PART II: DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................27

TABLE

     Current Lead Agents for Environmental Compliance .............................................................15




Change 2, 08/31/2018                                                 5                                                    CONTENTS
                                                                                     DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                                                  ENCLOSURE 1

                                                  REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
    Logistics ((USD)AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(b) DoD Directive 4715.1E, “Environment, Safety, and Occupational Health (ESOH),”
    March 19, 2005
(c) DoD Instruction 4715.6, “Environmental Compliance,” April 24, 1996 (hereby cancelled)
(d) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended
(e) DoD Instruction 4715.27, “DoD Low-Level Radioactive Waste (LLRW) Program,” July 7,
    2017
(f) DoD Manual 4715.06, “Regulations on Vessels Owned or Operated by the Department of
    Defense,” date varies by volume
(g) Title 42, United States Code
(h) Title 33, United States Code
(i) Title 15, United States Code
(j) DoD Instruction 4715.05, “Environmental Compliance at Installations Outside the United
    States,” November 1, 2013
(k) Joint Publication 4-04, “Joint Doctrine for Civil Engineering Support,” current edition
(l) Executive Order 12344, “Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program,” February 1, 1982
(m) DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation (DoD FMR),”
    date varies by volume
(n) DoD Instruction 4715.17, “Environmental Management Systems,” April 15, 2009
(o) Title 10, United States Code
(p) Executive Order 13693, “Planning for Federal Sustainability in the Next Decade,”
    March 25, 2015
(q) Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement, Subpart 223.8, “Ozone-Depleting
    Substances,” current edition
(r) DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
    DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(s) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
    of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(t) DoD Instruction 4715.02, “Regional Environmental Coordination,” August 28, 2009
(u) DoD Manual 4160.21, “Defense Materiel Disposition,” October 22, 2015
(v) DoD Manual 4140.01, “DoD Supply Chain Materiel Management Procedures,” dates vary
    by volume
(w) DoD Instruction 6050.05, “DoD Hazard Communication (HAZCOM) Program,”
    August 15, 2006
(x) Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations
(y) Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, Legal Opinion Memorandum,
    “Reimbursement or Payment Obligation of the Federal Government Under Section
    313(c)(2)(B) of the Clean Water Act,” February 25, 2011 1

1
    Available at http://www.justice.gov/olc/opiniondocs/stormwater-cardin-bill.pdf


Change 2, 08/31/2018                                       6                                   ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                           DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

(z)  United Nations Environment Programme, “The Montreal Protocol on Substances that
     Deplete the Ozone Layer,” current edition 2
(aa) Centers for Disease Control, “Recommendations for Using Fluoride to Prevent and Control
     Dental Caries in the United States,” April 17, 2001 3




2
    Available at http://ozone.unep.org/new_site/en/montreal_protocol.php
3
    Available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5014a1.htm


Change 2, 08/31/2018                                   7                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
ENVIRONMENT (ASD(EI&E)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)), the
ASD(EI&E):

   a. Oversees implementation of this instruction, including the use of appropriate metrics,
accountability of DoD Component-specific responsibilities, and annual review of the DoD
Component compliance programs.

    b. Implements the policy in Reference (b) and provides guidance, oversight, advocacy, and
representation for environmental compliance programs, to include achieving compliance through
pollution prevention initiatives and using the EMS framework in Reference (n).

    c. Develops, issues, and reviews environmental compliance goals. In consultation with the
DoD Components, approves the metrics established in Enclosure 4 of this instruction for
attaining those goals.

   d. Establishes environmental compliance priorities, policies, and guidance in consultation
with the DoD Components.

    e. Communicates with other federal agencies and States, tribal, and local governments on
environmental compliance matters of DoD concern. Communications with representatives of the
Legislative Branch must be conducted through the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Legislative Affairs, except for communications with the Defense Appropriations Committees,
which will be coordinated with the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief
Financial Officer (USD(C)/CFO).

    f. Designates and oversees lead agents for specific environmental compliance-related issues
or areas. Current lead agent designations are identified in Enclosure 5 of this instruction.

   g. Implements an integrated, coordinated Science and Technology Program to address
environmental compliance requirements with science and technology developments.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY (DLA). In addition to the responsibilities in
section 5 of this enclosure, and under the authority, direction, and control of the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Logistics and Materiel Readiness, the Director, DLA:

    a. In coordination with the other DoD Components, develops criteria and procedures for the
disposal of DoD-generated hazardous materials and wastes.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            8                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

    b. Operates and manages the DoD ODS Reserve for mission-critical weapon systems.
DLA’s role as central manager of the DoD ODS Reserve includes management of turn-in,
storage, reclamation, and issuance of mission-critical class I and II ODS to the Military Services
and the U.S. Coast Guard in support of U.S. military weapons systems worldwide. The DoD
ODS Reserve establishes and maintains procedures governing the operation of the Reserve for
class I and II ODS as part of the DoD efforts to comply with Reference (p).


3. USD(C)/CFO. The USD(C)/CFO provides fiscal policy and guidance to plan, budget, and
execute environmental requirements and comply with Office of Management and Budget
processes throughout the DoD.


4. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (GC DoD). Through the
Deputy General Counsel for Environment, Energy, and Installations, the GC DoD:

   a. Provides authoritative legal advice and counsel on matters covered by this instruction.

    b. Is the legal adviser to all committees, work groups, and other similar organizations formed
in accordance with this instruction.

    c. Reviews and approves, in advance, all requests for legal advice and opinions to other
federal agencies outside the DoD on matters covered by this instruction.


5. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

   a. Direct compliance with this instruction and require tenant activities to work cooperatively
with the host military installation to comply with this instruction.

    b. Implement programs to achieve, maintain, and monitor compliance with applicable
environmental requirements. Use the EMS framework in accordance with Reference (n), the
pollution prevention hierarchy (see paragraph 2.i. of Enclosure 3 of this instruction), and
sustainable practices to meet this responsibility.

   c. Plan, program, and budget for compliance with this instruction and DoD policy.

    d. Consult with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the appropriate Combatant
Commanders on issues involving compliance with environmental requirements that may affect
or impact readiness and the ability to support military operations.

    e. Provide support and representation to the DoD lead agent program identified in Enclosure
5 of this instruction.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            9                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

   f. Collect data on the effectiveness of environmental compliance programs and report
annually to ASD(EI&E) using the metrics established in Enclosure 4 and the reporting
requirements explained in Enclosure 6 of this instruction.

    g. Raise emerging DoD compliance issues to the ASD(EI&E) either through the lead agents
identified in Enclosure 5 of this instruction or directly, if a lead agent is not identified. For
regional compliance concerns, consult with DoD regional environmental coordinators in
accordance with DoDI 4715.02 (Reference (t)).

  h. Promptly notify the ASD(EI&E) of significant environmental events within the
Component.

    i. Require all major installations to conduct internal compliance self-assessments at least
annually, and external compliance self-assessments at least once every 3 years. Schedules for
other military installations will be determined by the responsible DoD Component. Compliance
self-assessments can be done in conjunction with EMS audits in accordance with Reference (n).

    j. Follow criteria and procedures in accordance with DoD 4160.21 Manual (Reference (u))
for disposal of hazardous material and hazardous wastes (HWs).

   k. Collaborate on innovative environmental research and development technologies, and
coordinate, through the ASD(EI&E), on the development of partnerships with federal agencies,
government laboratories, States, tribal, and local governments, and the private sector.

   l. Minimize emissions of greenhouse gases in accordance with Reference (p).

   m. Require that all documents described in section 4 of this enclosure are routed for review
and advance approval through the GC DoD.


6. DoD COMPONENT HEADS DESIGNATED AS LEAD AGENTS. DoD Component heads
designated as lead agents provide management and leadership in meeting the responsibilities of a
lead agent for specific environmental compliance-related areas when designated by ASD(EI&E)
in accordance with paragraph 1f of this enclosure. Lead agent designations and their
responsibilities are listed in Enclosure 5 of this instruction.


7. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. In addition to the responsibilities in section 5 of this
enclosure, the Secretary of the Army, in coordination with the other DoD Component heads,
updates the compliance self-assessment program checklist and guide for DoD to support
paragraph 5i of this enclosure.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           10                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. INTRODUCTION. These procedures are for implementing compliance responsibilities
related to pollution prevention, partnering, and specific regulatory requirements.


2. DoD COMPONENTS. In accordance with this instruction, the DoD Components:

   a. Minimize the use, release, and disposal of toxic and hazardous materials. Use a lifecycle
approach that considers the selection, management, use, and disposal of toxic or hazardous
chemicals in all of its operations. Use the supply chain procedures in DoD Manual 4140.01
(Reference (v)) and the disposition procedures in Reference (u).

    b. Identify and implement efficiencies to reduce compliance costs and simplify requirements
to the maximum extent possible.

    c. Use cooperative solutions to provide needed environmental facilities or services (e.g.,
waste storage, collection, and disposal facilities or services, and water supply or wastewater
treatment works) where economically advantageous and consistent with mission requirements.
Shared solutions may include working with other DoD military installations, other federal
agencies, or public and private entities when consistent with section 2692 of Reference (o). This
may include, when otherwise authorized, transfer of ownership through contractual agreements
to municipal or private sources to provide such services.

   d. Participate in the development of federal, States, tribal, regional and local plans and
programs that achieve, maintain, and enhance environmental quality (e.g., watershed protection
and management plans, and air quality implementation plans).

   e. Use commercially proven solutions to achieve, maintain, and monitor compliance.
Promote the development and use of innovative solutions for the prevention of pollution where
economically advantageous and consistent with mission requirements.

    f. As soon as circumstances allow, but no later than required by law, report to regulators all
information required by applicable statutes, regulations, permits, orders, and agreements.

   g. Promptly correct any environmental violations discovered.

   h. Use supplemental environmental projects (SEPs), preferably those involving pollution
prevention features, to offset fines and penalties, where appropriate and allowed by fiscal law.

    i. Use the following pollution prevention hierarchy to develop environmental compliance
solutions while protecting, preserving, restoring, and enhancing the quality of the environment.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            11                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                      DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

        (1) Prevent pollution at the source, focusing on elimination or substitution of materials
early in the acquisition process.

       (2) Reuse materials that cannot be eliminated.

       (3) Recycle materials that cannot be reused.

       (4) Treat pollution that cannot be eliminated or recycled.

       (5) Dispose or release pollution into the environment only as a last recourse and only
where such disposal or release can be controlled and conducted in a manner that is safe and
consistent with applicable legal requirements.

       (6) Consider waste-to-energy alternatives before disposal, where shown to be practical,
environmentally beneficial, and allowed by State or locality.

   j. Following the guidance in Enclosure 7 of this instruction, consult with appropriate legal
counsel to determine whether an assessment for stormwater management in accordance with the
CWA is payable as a legitimate fee or should be refused as an impermissible tax.

   k. Provide oversight to confirm facilities’ operations optimize fluoridation at DoD-owned or
-operated community water systems serving more than 3,300 persons.


3. DoD MILITARY INSTALLATIONS. The DoD military installations:

    a. Must determine if reporting is needed in accordance with the various EPCRA sections
(see Chapter 116 of Reference (g) and Reference (p) ). If reporting is needed, submit the report
to all applicable EPCRA authorities and meet the deadline for submission.

    b. Must apply the EPCRA definition of “facility” to assess EPCRA section 313 applicability,
including threshold quantities for chemical releases. EPCRA section 313 reporting from
operational range activities must be tracked separately from the main military installation, as
operational ranges are not included in toxic chemical release reduction goals.

    c. Are not required to comply with State and local right-to-know requirements, and must not
pay for State and local right-to-know requirements such as implementation plans. National
Guard installations should consult with their legal offices to determine if they are required to
comply with State and local right-to-know requirements and for a determination of appropriate
fees paid to State or local governments and reporting requirements for State and local planning.

   d. Must not report any EPCRA information on publicly available websites that may pose a
security concern or create a threat to critical infrastructure.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            12                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

    e. Must implement information and management controls that minimize the use of hazardous
materials, and obtain product hazard data in accordance with DoDI 6050.05 (Reference (w)) and
section 2222 of Reference (o).

   f. Must maintain an HW minimization program to reduce volume and toxicity of waste
generated, in accordance with section 6922(b) of Reference (g) and section 2222 of
Reference (o).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                         13                              ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                                       ENCLOSURE 4

                       ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE METRICS


These metrics are indicators to help determine DoD military installation compliance with
environmental requirements:

   a. Clean Air. Emissions of criteria pollutants and hazardous air pollutants (HAPs).

   b. Clean Water. Percentage of regulated water pollution control discharge permits in
compliance with applicable requirements.

   c. Safe Drinking Water. Percentage of DoD population served by DoD public water systems
(PWSs) that meet established health-based drinking water standards.

   d. HW. Reductions in HW disposed off-site and treated on-site.

    e. Enforcement Actions. Number of enforcement actions received from local, State, and
federal environmental regulators.

   f. Environmental Permits. Number of environmental permits by statute.

   g. Fines and Penalties. Dollar amount of fines and penalties assessed and paid.

   h. Significant Non-compliance (SNC). Military installations on the Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) SNC list.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                          14                               ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                      DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                                         ENCLOSURE 5

                  LEAD AGENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE


1. DoD Components serving as lead agents perform the responsibilities or functions related to a
specific environmental program area or issue. Current lead agents are listed in the Table.

                   Table. Current Lead Agents for Environmental Compliance

                             Environmental Area                        Lead Agent
               CAA                                                    Navy
               CWA                                                    Navy
               Low-level Radioactive Waste                            Army
               National and Regional Response Team                    Navy
               RCRA                                                   Army
               SDWA                                                   Air Force

2. Lead agent functions include:

   a. Assist the ASD(EI&E) with coordination, management, and implementation of key
environmental program areas or issues.

   b. Organize and chair appropriate DoD Component steering committees and meetings
necessary to facilitate lead agent responsibilities or resolve pending issues.

   c. Develop operating principles for consideration by the ASD(EI&E) as necessary.

  d. Coordinate lead agent activities with the Office of the ASD(EI&E), other DoD
Components, and DoD regional environmental coordinator offices, as appropriate.

   e. Track regulatory activity; identify their budget impact, if possible; and prepare, coordinate
with the ASD(EI&E) and other DoD Components, and submit comments to appropriate
regulatory authorities, as necessary.

   f. Recommend policy and implementing guidance to the ASD(EI&E).

   g. Report, as requested, on program areas to the ASD(EI&E).

   h. Track legislation and significant and emerging issues.

   i. Plan, program, and budget for serving as lead agent.

3. In addition to the functions in section 2 of this enclosure, the CAA lead agent, through their
Service’s steering committee, will develop ODS program recommendations for DoD
Components to include:


Change 2, 08/31/2018                            15                                ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                   DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015



   a. Turn-in of used and excess ODS and its eventual disposition in accordance with the
procedures in Reference (u).

   b. Eliminating reliance on ODS.

    c. Providing estimates for ODS requirements that DLA will use in accordance with section 2
of Enclosure 2 of this instruction.

   d. Minimizing emissions of ODS in accordance with the requirements of part 82 of Title 40,
Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (x)).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                          16                              ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                      DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                                          ENCLOSURE 6

               ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE DATA REQUIREMENTS


DoD Components will provide the following data (in accordance with section 5f of Enclosure 2
of this instruction) as part of the annual environmental management information review by the
ASD(EI&E):

   a. Air Emissions. Provide air emissions data for the previous calendar year from stationary
sources.

       (1) Criteria Pollutant Emissions. In tons per year.

           (a) Ozone. Reported as volatile organic compounds and nitrogen oxides.

           (b) Particulate matter (PM).

               1. 2.5 microns (PM-2.5).

               2. 10 microns (PM-10).

           (c) Nitrogen dioxides. Reported as nitrogen oxides.

           (d) Sulfur dioxide.

           (e) Carbon monoxide.

           (f) Lead.

       (2) HAPs. One total number in tons per year.

   b. Clean Water. Provide clean water permit data on a fiscal year (FY) basis.

       (1) Data

           (a) Total number of water pollution control permits.

          (b) Number of water pollution control permits in compliance with applicable
requirements.

       (2) Data Element Descriptions

           (a) Water Pollution Control Permit Criteria. For this data requirement, a water
pollution control permit is an authorization, license, or equivalent control document issued by the




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            17                                ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                        DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

EPA or a State or local agency to control pollutant discharges into waters of the United States or
to a wastewater treatment plant. Permit applicability determination is as follows:

               1. Included are permits for domestic wastewater, industrial wastewater and
stormwater discharges, and wastewater discharges to publicly owned treatment works. For the
purposes of this clean water data requirement, only report permits that have received final
regulatory agency action, not draft or proposed permits.

               2. Not included are:

                   a. Stormwater construction permits.

                  b. CWA permits for wetlands, dredging, sludge, or non-construction-related
sediment and erosion control activities covered in sections 401, 403, 404, and 405 of Reference
(h).

                   c. CWA permits for discharges of pesticides into waters of the United States.

                   d. Permits for the operation of wastewater collection systems.

           (b) CWA Compliance Issues Determination. For the purposes of the DoD clean
water metric data (see paragraph b(1)(b) of this section), if a facility answers “yes” to any of the
questions in paragraphs b(2)(b)1 through b(2)(b)8 of this section, they are considered to have
reportable compliance issues. During the reporting period, has the facility:

              1. At any given discharge point, exceeded the same effluent limit for any 2 or
more consecutive months or more than 3 months during the FY?

                2. Had any prohibited bypass event, unpermitted discharge, or pass-through of
pollution to a water body?

               3. Failed to comply with permit requirements or special provisions within 90
days of the scheduled due date outlined in the permit?

               4. Failed to submit a required report on time?

               5. Received an enforcement action or failed to resolve or correct a condition from
a previous enforcement action?

               6. Failed to meet the requirements or schedule of a signed compliance
agreement?

              7. Failed to develop or implement a required program or plan, such as a
stormwater pollution prevention plan or pretreatment program?

               8. Failed to satisfy sampling, monitoring, or testing requirements?



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             18                                 ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                     DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015



   c. Safe Drinking Water. Provide safe drinking water data on an FY basis.

       (1) Data

           (a) DoD Population Served by Regulated DoD PWSs

               1. Total population.

              2. Total population that received water that did not attain one or more health-
based drinking water standards in accordance with the SDWA.

              3. Total population that received water meeting all SDWA (health-based)
standards. To determine this amount, the amount found in paragraph c(1)(a)2 is subtracted from
the amount from paragraph c(1)(a)1 of this section.

              4. Percentage of the population that received water meeting all SDWA health-
based drinking water standards during the reporting period.

           (b) DoD Population Served by Other DoD PWSs

               1. Total population.

               2. Total population that received notification that one or more health-based
drinking water standards in accordance with the SDWA were not attained by their water
supplier.

              3. Total population that received water meeting all SDWA health-based drinking
water standards. To determine this amount, the amount found in paragraph c(1)(b)2 is subtracted
from the amount from paragraph c(1)(b)1 of this section.

              4. Percentage of the population that received water meeting all SDWA health-
based drinking water standards during the reporting period.

           (c) Sum of DoD Population

               1. Total population that received water that did not attain SDWA health-based
drinking water standards.

               2. Percentage of the total DoD population that received water meeting SDWA
health-based drinking water standards.

       (2) Data Element Descriptions

            (a) DoD PWS. For this data requirement, a DoD PWS that provides drinking water
to a fixed installation controlled by DoD is delineated as “regulated” or “other”. A “regulated”



Change 2, 08/31/2018                           19                                ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                        DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

DoD PWS is where the PWS is owned by DoD and “other” DoD PWS is where drinking water is
provided to DoD by a non-DoD owned PWS in accordance with section 300f(4) of Reference
(g).

            (b) Health-based Drinking Water Standards. If drinking water standards are not met,
there is the potential for health-based risks. Applicable standards are issued for specific
contaminants and criteria in accordance with part 141 of Reference (x), also known as the
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, as authorized by the SDWA or equivalent State
or local statutory requirements, having a prescribed maximum contaminant level (MCL),
maximum residual disinfectant level (MRDL), or treatment technique (TT).

                1. When a DoD PWS has a documented violation of an MCL, MRDL, or the
prescribed TT, the entire system is considered to be in violation of the standard unless the
violation is only in a portion of the distribution system that is physically or hydraulically isolated
from other parts of the distribution system, and the primacy agency allows the system to limit
distribution of the public notice resulting from the violation to only persons served by that
portion of the distribution system that is out of compliance.

                2. Sample results that trigger established action levels in accordance with the
SDWA are not considered violations of health-based drinking water standards because the action
levels trigger additional actions that must be taken for a water system to be found compliant.

                3. If there is no documented MCL, MRDL, or TT violation, but one or more of
the situations described in paragraphs c(2)(a)3a through c(2)(a)3g of this section apply, the
system is considered to be in violation of drinking water standards with potential health-based
effects.

                     a. Fecal coliform MCL violation or failure to test for fecal contamination
after a total coliform test is positive.

                  b. Nitrate, nitrite, or combined nitrate and nitrite MCL violation or failure to
take a confirmation sample.

                  c. Chlorine dioxide MRDL violation in the distribution system or failure to
take repeat samples in the distribution system.

                  d. Exceedance of maximum allowable turbidity level resulting in an MCL or
TT violation, when the State or EPA determines an SDWA Tier I notice is warranted.

                 e. Special public notice for non-community water systems with nitrate
exceedances between 10 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and 20 mg/l, when allowed to exceed the
MCL of 10 mg/l by the State.

                   f. Waterborne disease outbreak or other waterborne emergency.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             20                                  ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                       DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                 g. Other violations, including monitoring violations determined by the
primacy agency to require an SDWA Tier I or Tier II public notification.

          (c) Other DoD PWS. A DoD PWS that is either a privatized system or meets all
these exemption criteria:

               1. Receives its water from another regulated PWS.

               2. Does not provide any additional treatment to the water.

               3. Does not sell any of the water it receives.

              4. Does not supply the water to commercial carriers conveying passengers in
interstate commerce.

        (3) Additional Reporting Requirements. Provide a description of the nature and
estimated duration of each instance the DoD Component did not attain a health-based drinking
water standard that occurred during the reporting period. The description should include name
and location of the military installation, nature of the issue, DoD population affected, duration of
the issue, corrective actions taken or planned, and estimated date for achieving the standard.

   d. HW Disposal

      (1) Data. At the DoD Component level, provide the amount of all HW, in thousands of
pounds, on an FY basis.

           (a) Shipped off-site.

           (b) Treated on-site.

       (2) Data Element Descriptions

           (a) HW Shipped Off-Site. For reporting purposes of this metric, HW shipped off-site
includes HW, as defined by RCRA, but is limited to that HW that requires an EPA or State
manifest and to universal waste that does not require a manifest. It does not include construction
or demolition wastes such as asbestos or lead contaminated debris, unless regulated by States as
HW in accordance with RCRA authority. These are examples of HW shipped off-site that
should be included when shipped off the military installation using a manifest:

               1. State regulated HW.

               2. Spill-related HW (from ongoing activities and exceeding State contaminant
thresholds).

               3. Remediation HW.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             21                                ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                       DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                 4. HW manifested for recycling (e.g., spent solvent recycling).

            (b) HW Treated On-site. All HW treated or disposed in a RCRA permitted, or
interim status, treatment or disposal facility located on a DoD military installation. This includes
all HW treated or disposed on-site and included in the RCRA biennial or State HW report,
including both conventional and chemical munition demilitarization wastes. Do not include
wastes excluded:

                1. By subparts 261.5(c) and 261.5(d) of Reference (x). Specifically, wastes
treated in an on-site wastewater treatment plant should not be included.

                 2. From RCRA treatment permitting requirements by subpart 264.1(g)(6) of
Reference (x).

   e. Enforcement Actions. Provide compliance enforcement action data on an FY basis for:

       (1) Number of new enforcement actions received by statute:

           (a) CAA.

           (b) CWA.

           (c) RCRA, subtitle C for HW.

           (d) RCRA, subtitle I for underground storage tanks.

           (e) RCRA, subtitle D for solid waste.

           (f) SDWA.

           (g) Other.

       (2) Number of open enforcement actions received by category:

           (a) Administrative enforcement actions.

           (b) Project-related enforcement actions.

       (3) Number of closed enforcement actions.

      (4) Number of regulatory inspections conducted by federal, State, and local
governments.

    f. Environmental Permits by Statute. Provide the number of environmental permits, by
statute and media, received on an FY basis for:




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             22                                ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                    DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

       (1) CAA, Title V.

       (2) CWA.

       (3) RCRA, subtitle C, part B.

       (4) RCRA, subtitle C, part B applications pending approval and in interim status.

       (5) RCRA, subtitle I for underground storage tanks.

       (6) RCRA, subtitle D for solid waste.

       (7) SDWA.

       (8) Other.

   g. Fines and Penalties Assessed in an FY. Provide FY data for federal, State, and local:

       (1) Fines assessed.

       (2) Fines paid, including monetary and non-monetary penalties and SEPs.

    h. SNC. Provide the number of military installations on the EPA’s SNC list as of the end of
the FY, including the cause for the SNC and actions taken to correct the SNC. The EPA
Enforcement and Compliance History Online database, found at https://echo.epa.gov, provides
guidance on SNCs for various media.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           23                              ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                          DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                                           ENCLOSURE 7

        CWA STORMWATER REASONABLE FEE DETERMINATION GUIDANCE


1. The guidance in this enclosure will be used in consultation with appropriate legal counsel
to determine whether an assessment for stormwater management in accordance with the
CWA is payable as a legitimate fee or should be refused as an impermissible tax. This
guidance has no application to payments of assessments in accordance with other laws.
Section 1323(c) of the Reference (h) amendment has two general effects:

   a. Section 1323(c)(1) of Reference (h) explains what constitutes a reasonable service
charge for purposes related to stormwater runoff.

        (1) For stormwater charges, the reasonable service charge must meet the criteria in
paragraphs 1a(1)(a) through 1a(1)(g) of this section, regardless of whether the fee, charge, or
assessment is or is not denominated a tax. These criteria may, in any particular case, expand
or contract what qualifies as a reasonable service charge for purposes of stormwater runoff.
The service charge:

            (a) Must relate to the control and abatement of water pollution.

            (b) Must be reasonable.

            (c) Must be nondiscriminatory.

           (d) Must be based on some fair approximation of the proportionate contribution of
the property or facility to stormwater pollution.

          (e) Must be measured in terms of quantities of pollutants, or volume or rate of
stormwater discharge or runoff from the property or facility.

          (f) Must be used to pay or reimburse the costs associated with any stormwater
management program, whether associated with a separate storm sewer system or a sewer system
that manages a combination of stormwater and sanitary waste.

            (g) May include the full range of programmatic and structural costs attributable to
collecting stormwater, reducing pollutants in stormwater, and reducing the volume and rate of
stormwater discharge.

       (2) Waivers of sovereign immunity, such as that contained in section 1323(c)(1) of
Reference (h), are fact specific in application (i.e., it is difficult to fashion a general conclusion
as to whether individual service charges fit within the statutory definition and are or are not
payable). That caution may be even more applicable in the case of section 1323(c)(1) of
Reference (h), since it is significantly more detailed than are references to reasonable service
charges found in other waivers of sovereign immunity, as well as the general waiver found in



Change 2, 08/31/2018                               24                                 ENCLOSURE 7
                                                                     DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

section 1323(a) of Reference (h). Because it adds detail to what would otherwise constitute a
reasonable service charge in accordance with section 1323(a) of Reference (h), there are more
criteria to apply than is typical in determining whether a specific stormwater charge is a
reasonable service charge and payable.

   b. Section 1323(c)(2) of Reference (h) addresses matters relating to appropriations law.

2. The concerns relating to section 1323(c)(2) of Reference (h) are addressed in a legal opinion
in the Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, Legal Opinion Memorandum
(Reference (y)).

    a. No stormwater charge should be denied based on the lack of specific appropriations act
language.

   b. Such charges should be paid, as they have been in the past, using appropriations otherwise
available to the DoD. Generally, this will be operation and maintenance appropriations.

    c. Section 1323(c) of the Reference (h) amendment is not retroactive in effect. It only
applies prospectively to charges with an assessment date (not the payment due date) after the
date of enactment, January 4, 2011.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           25                                ENCLOSURE 7
                                                                    DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

                                         GLOSSARY


                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

  ASD(EI&E)            Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations and
                       Environment


  CAA                  Clean Air Act
  CWA                  Clean Water Act


  DLA                  Defense Logistics Agency
  DoDD                 DoD directive
  DoDI                 DoD instruction


  E.O.                 Executive order
  EMS                  Environmental Management System
  EPA                  Environmental Protection Agency
  EPCRA                Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act


  FY                   fiscal year


  GC DoD               General Counsel of the Department of Defense


  HAP                  hazardous air pollutant
  HW                   hazardous waste


  MCL                  maximum contaminant level
  mg/l                 milligrams per liter
  MRDL                 maximum residual disinfectant level


  ODS                  ozone-depleting substances


  PM                   particulate matter
  PWS                  public water system


  RCRA                 Resource Conservation and Recovery Act


Change 2, 08/31/2018                             26                                   GLOSSARY
                                                                       DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015



  SDWA                  Safe Drinking Water Act
  SEP                   supplemental environmental project
  SNC                   significant non-compliance


  TT                    treatment technique


  U.S.C.                United States Code
  USD(AT&L)             Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
  USD(C)/CFO            Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                        Department of Defense


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

compliance. Adherence to and attainment of all applicable federal, State, tribal, and local
regulatory environmental requirements or standards.

compliance self-assessment. An evaluation of the environmental, natural, and cultural resources
compliance posture and overall environmental management program. The compliance self-
assessment does not include inspections conducted by a regulatory agency. There are two types
of self-assessments:

    external compliance self-assessments. Inspections or evaluations conducted by designated
persons from outside the military installation being inspected.

    internal compliance self-assessments. Inspections or evaluations conducted by the military
installation personnel or their designees.

criteria pollutants. A group of common air pollutants regulated by the EPA on the basis of health
and/or environmental effects. The EPA has currently established six criteria air pollutants as:
ozone (as measured by the presence of nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds), PM,
nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, and lead. Criteria air pollutants are regulated
by health-based standards called National Ambient Air Quality Standards.

enforcement action. A formal, written notification by the EPA or other authorized federal, State,
tribal, or local environmental regulatory agency of violation of any applicable statutory or
regulatory requirement. Enforcement action does not include warning letters or informal notices
of deficiencies or notices of deficiencies to permit applications. One written notice, regardless of
the number of individual violations, findings, or citation listed in it, counts as one enforcement
action. If a written enforcement action cites violations of more than one statutory requirement, it


Change 2, 08/31/2018                             27                                   GLOSSARY
                                                                        DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

counts as multiple enforcement actions, one in each of the applicable statutory requirement
categories. Items found to be out of compliance during an internal or other DoD Component
review, compliance review, or audit, are not included in this definition of enforcement action.

   closed enforcement action. An enforcement action that is resolved by:

       Revocation of the action by the imposing regulator;

       Closure of the action following written notice by the regulator that the action is closed;

       Closure of the action, after a reasonable time span, following written notice to the
regulator of intent to close an enforcement action; or

       Receipt of a signed compliance agreement or order.

    open enforcement action. An enforcement action that has been issued but is not yet closed
by one of the resolutions described in the definition of closed enforcement action. An open
enforcement action is further broken down into two subcategories:

       pending enforcement action. An enforcement action for which the deficiencies are
corrected, but remain open, pending agreement by the regulator that it is closed.

        unresolved enforcement action. An enforcement action for which the deficiencies are not
yet corrected.

    new enforcement action. Any enforcement action received during the reporting period, even
if both received and closed out during the period. The date of an enforcement action is
considered the date of the formal written notification.

   enforcement actions by category. Categorizes the type of violation received based on
whether the correction action requires a project or administrative action.

        project-related enforcement action. Violation that requires a facility-related change to
correct, regardless of funding level, minor or major construction, or repairs. If a single
enforcement action contains both project- and administrative or operational-related violations,
show the action as “project related.”

       administrative-related enforcement action. Any violation that results from incorrect
administrative procedures (e.g., labeling problems, late reporting, improper storage of material
and waste, and training.)

environmental requirements. All substantive and procedural environmental requirements
provided in applicable federal, State, tribal, and local statutes and regulations, and in applicable
E.O.s.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             28                                     GLOSSARY
                                                                       DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

government-owned, contractor-operated. A facility that is owned by the Federal Government but
operated by private contractors without direct federal management, although a federal
contracting staff may be present.

HAPs. Chemicals that present through inhalation or other routes of exposure, a threat of adverse
health effects or adverse environmental effects whether through ambient concentrations,
bioaccumulation, or deposition. Common HAPS include benzene, chlorine, and ethylene glycol.
These pollutants are regulated by the National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants.

major installation. Large and medium installations determined by the Military Service based on
their end-of-year real property asset data submission installations table.

military installation. A base, camp, post, station, yard, center, or other activity under the
jurisdiction of the DoD, including any leased facility, which is located in the United States.

Montreal Protocol. Refers to the international treaty, “Montreal Protocol on Substances that
Deplete the Ozone Layer” (Reference (z)). This treaty is designed to protect the ozone layer in
the earth’s atmosphere from depletion by phasing out ozone depleting substances. The treaty
was agreed to in 1987 and last revised in 1999. The United States ratified the Montreal Protocol
in 1988 and has joined four subsequent amendments.

ODS. The substances controlled internationally in accordance with Reference (z) and nationally
in accordance with section 7671 (Title VI) of Reference (g). This includes:

    class I substance. Any substance designated as class I in Reference (p), including
chlorofluorocarbons, halons, carbon tetrachloride, and methyl chloroform and any other
substance so designated by the EPA by regulation at a later date.

    class II substance. Any substance designated as class II in Reference (p), including
hydrochlorofluorocarbons and any other substance so designated by the EPA by regulation at a
later date.

ODS Reserve. DoD program, managed by DLA, to oversee current and future stock levels of
critical ODS’s are maintained for military applications for the life cycle of the equipment. It
provides a continuous supply of refrigerants, halons, and solvents to maintain mission-critical
weapon system readiness.

optimize fluoridation. The ability to treat drinking water to the optimally adjusted concentrations
of fluoride indicated in the Centers for Disease Control national guidelines, “Recommendations
for Using Fluoride to Prevent and Control Dental Caries in the United States” (Reference (aa)).

pollution prevention. The identification and reduction or elimination of activities, areas, or
processes that create excessive waste products or pollutants. Includes practices that reduce or
eliminate the creation of pollutants through increased efficiency in the use of raw material,
energy, water, or other resources.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            29                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                      DoDI 4715.06, May 4, 2015

regulatory inspections during reporting period. All inspections by federal, State, and local
regulators not including self-audits or inspections by any DoD entity. Multimedia inspections
are considered one inspection for each media area inspected.

SEPs. Environmentally beneficial projects that an alleged violator agrees to undertake in full or
partial settlement of an enforcement action, but which the alleged violator is not otherwise
legally required to perform. SEPs can play a role in securing significant environmental and
economic benefits, and protection of public health and the environment.

significant environmental event. A noteworthy environmental achievement or occurrence, either
positive or negative, that may be of interest to or require a timely and appropriate response from
the ASD(EI&E) level or above. Such occurrences may involve compliance with environmental
statutes, criminal environmental enforcement actions, major oil or chemical emergencies or
spills, or assessed fines or penalties over 1 million dollars.

storage. When used in reference to storage of toxic and hazardous waste (as defined in section
2692 of Reference (o)), a non-transitory, semi-permanent or permanent holding, placement, or
leaving of material. It does not include a temporary accumulation of a limited quantity of a
material used in or a waste generated or resulting from authorized activities, such as servicing,
maintenance, or repair of DoD items, equipment, or facilities.

Tier I and Tier II. Defined in part 1414 of Reference (x).

toxic or hazardous materials. Pollutants that may result in significant harm to human health or
the environment including:

   Hazardous substances defined in section 9601(14) of Reference (g), also known as the
“Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.”

   Ozone depleting substances designated in accordance with section 7671 of Reference (g).

   Toxic chemicals defined in section 11049 of Reference (g).

United States. The several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealths of Puerto Rico
and the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Midway and Wake Islands, the U.S.
Virgin Islands, any other territory or possession of the United States, and associated navigable
waters, contiguous zones, and ocean waters of which the natural resources are under the
exclusive management authority of the United States.

unorganized U.S. territories. Territories in which Congress has not authorized the local
inhabitants to organize civil government. These include Wake, Midway, and Johnston Islands
and Palmyra and Kingman Reefs.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            30                                    GLOSSARY
