                                  Department of Defense
                                    INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 5410.17
                                                                              September 15, 2006

                                                                                           USD(P)

SUBJECT: United States Field Studies Program (FSP) for International Military and Civilian
         Students and Military-Sponsored Visitors

References: (a) DoD Directive 5410.17, “Informational Program for Foreign Military
                Trainees in the United States,” March 1, 1985 (hereby canceled)
            (b) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DoD Directives Review – Phase
                II,” July 13, 2005
            (c) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),”
                December 8, 1999
            (d) Sections 2271, 2295, 2347, 2347b, and 2751 – 2799aa-2 of title 22, United
                States Code, Foreign Relations and Intercourse
            (e) through (j), see Enclosure 1


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Instruction reissues Reference (a) as a DoD Instruction according to the guidance in
References (b) and (c) to update DoD policy and assign responsibilities within the Department of
Defense for a U.S. Field Studies Program (FSP). The policy is reissued to enhance the formal
training courses and orientation of international military and civilian students and military-
sponsored visitors (hereafter referred to collectively as “international students and visitors”) to
the United States under the Security Assistance Training Program and other programs
administered through security assistance channels.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, the DoD
Security Assistance Organizations, and all other organizational entities in the Department of
Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).
                                                                DoDI 5410.17, September 15, 2006

3. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:

    3.1. The achievement of democracy, respect for human rights, peace, and equitable
economic growth depends primarily on the cooperation of people and governments. The United
States can make a significant contribution to promulgating peaceful and democratic principles by
exposing international students and visitors to American society, institutions, and ideals.

    3.2. The FSP shall provide international students and visitors the opportunity to obtain a
balanced understanding of the United States and to increase their awareness of the basic issues
involving internationally recognized human rights.

   3.3. The FSP shall be developed and implemented pursuant to Sections 2271, 2295, 2347
2347b, and 2751 – 2799aa of title 22, United States Code (Reference (d)), with the objective of
providing participants in the FSP with an awareness and understanding of the facets of the
American democratic way of life set forth in Section 5.

    3.4. Costs associated with the implementation of the FSP shall be included in course tuition
rates. These costs shall include transportation, meals, lodging, admission, programs, and
incidental expenses thereof, in accordance with DoD 5105.38-M (Reference (e)) and DoD
7000.14-R (Reference (f)).

    3.5. Funds supporting the FSP shall not be expended to pay for alcoholic beverages or
entertainment expenses for activities that are substantially of a recreational character, including
but not limited to entrance fees at sporting events, theatrical and musical productions, and
amusement parks, in compliance with relevant appropriations provisions of Section 548 of
Public Law 109-102 (Reference (g)).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

    4.1. The Director, Defense Security Cooperation Agency, under the authority and control of
the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, shall:

       4.1.1. Direct and supervise the FSP.

       4.1.2. Publish instructions to implement the FSP, in accordance with Reference (e).

        4.1.3. Provide guidance to the Commandant, Defense Institute of Security Assistance
Management, as appropriate in the formulation and preparation of material for the orientation
and training of U.S. personnel involved in executing the program.

   4.2. The Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) shall establish pricing policy for the FSP
according to Reference (f).




                                                  2
                                                                        DoDI 5410.17, September 15, 2006

    4.3. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

        4.3.1. Establish, operate, and monitor the FSP at their respective installations and
military schools in accordance with the guidance herein and Reference (e).

        4.3.2. Provide adequate staffing at installations and military schools to support the FSP.

   4.4. The Commanders of the Geographic Combatant Commands, through the Security
Assistance Organizations in each country, shall:

        4.4.1. Provide information on the FSP to all international students and visitors prior to
their departure from their respective countries of residence for training at U.S. installations or
military schools.

       4.4.2. Review regional FSP activities to ensure that the program meets regional security
cooperation objectives in accordance with the guidance of the Secretary of Defense.

    4.5. The President of the National Defense University (NDU), under the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall ensure that NDU institutions involved in educating international
students:

        4.5.1. Establish, administer, operate, and review the FSP based on guidance in this
Instruction and in compliance with relevant appropriations provisions of Reference (g).

        4.5.2. Review staffing to ensure that personnel support for the FSP is adequate.


5. PROCEDURES

The FSP shall be developed and implemented to provide participants with an awareness and
understanding of the following facets of the American democratic way of life.

    5.1. Human Rights. U.S. commitment to basic principles of internationally recognized
human rights as reflected in United Nations General Assembly Resolution 217 A (III),
“Universal Declaration of Human Rights,”1 (Reference (h)) and The Constitution of the United
States of America2 (Reference (i)). This aspect of American life shall be emphasized in
conjunction with all FSP topics below.

    5.2. Law of War. That part of international law that regulates the conduct of armed
hostilities, often called the “law of armed conflict” (Joint Publication 1-02 (Reference (j)). For
the purposes of this Instruction, the law of war encompasses all international law for the conduct
of hostilities binding on the United States or its individual citizens, including treaties and


1
 Copies may be obtained via the Internet at http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html
2
 Copies may be obtained via the Internet at http://www.archives.gov/national-archives-experience/charters/
constitution.html


                                                        3
                                                                DoDI 5410.17, September 15, 2006

international agreements to which the United States is a part, and applicable customary
international law.

    5.3. International Peace and Security. How the United States accomplishes effective and
mutually beneficial relations and increased understanding with foreign countries in furtherance
of the goals of international peace and security.

    5.4. U.S. Government Institutions. U.S. institutions of democratic governance, including
electoral and legislative processes and civilian control of the military, and the institution and
improvement of public administration at the national, intergovernmental, State, and local levels.

    5.5. Political Processes. American democracy and political reform, including opening the
political process to all members of society, the practice of free elections, freedom of association,
and the influence of various governmental and non-governmental organizations that promote
democracy, the rule of law, transparency, and accountability in the political process.

    5.6. Judicial System. The U.S. establishment of the rule of law and an effective judicial
system, the role of the military justice system and its procedures, and the laws and institutions for
addressing extremist violence and taking effective action to prosecute those who are alleged to
have committed crimes.

    5.7. Free Market System. The success of the U.S. economy due to land reform, reform in
tax systems, encouragement of private enterprise and individual initiative, creation of favorable
investment climates, curbing corruption where it exists, and spurring balanced trade; the
independent roles of labor and management in negotiating pay, working hours and conditions,
and other benefits associated with employment; the factors underlying industrial and agricultural
production, and how environmental protection has altered each; and the role of environmental
protection.

    5.8. Media. The role of a free press and other communications media in American life; how
diversity of media ensures people of all races, creeds, and political persuasions can be heard
(e.g., editorials, letters to the editor) and ensures diverse, pluralistic culture.

   5.9. Education. The purpose and range of educational institutions, the value of an educated
and responsible citizenry, and the educational opportunities available to all citizens.

    5.10. Health and Human Services. The U.S. institutions that provide quality health care and
voluntary family planning services, housing, and other services, and the policies that are
components of a social safety net, particularly for infants, children, the elderly, and people with
disabilities.

    5.11. Diversity and American Life. How the United States fosters political, economic, and
social pluralism; the geographic, religious, and social diversity of American life; progress in
applying American ideals to ethnic minorities and women, including how they address gender-
based violence. How American families live and work in cities, towns, and rural areas; how




                                                 4
                                                            DoDI 5410.17, September 15, 2006

Americans function in communities, worship, work together in organizations, and participate in
and support cultural and historical events; the role of volunteerism in American life.


6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosure
   E1. References, continued




                                               5
                                                         DoDI 5410.17, September 15, 2006



                                   E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                REFERENCES, continued


(e) DoD 5105.38-M, “Security Assistance Management Manual,” October 3, 2003
(f) DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation, Volume 15,”
    March 18, 1993
(g) Section 548 of Public Law 109-102, “Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related
    Programs Appropriations Act, 2006,” November 14, 2005
(h) United Nations General Assembly Resolution 217 A (III), "Universal Declaration of
    Human Rights," December 10, 1948
(i) The Constitution of the United States of America, September 17, 1787, as amended
(j) Joint Publication 1-02, “DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,” as amended
    through April 14, 2006




                                            6                             ENCLOSURE 1
