                               Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                         NUMBER 4165.70
                                                                               April 6, 2005
                                                     Incorporating Change 1, August 31, 2018

                                                                                        USD(A&S)

SUBJECT: Real Property Management

References: (a) DoD Directive 4165.6, “Real Property,” October 13, 2004
            (b) DoD Directive 4275.5, “Acquisition and Management of Industrial Resources,”
                March 15, 2005
            (c) DoD Directive 5110.4 “Washington Headquarters Services (WHS),”
                October 19, 2001
            (d) Executive Order 13327, “Federal Real Property Asset Management,”
                February 4, 2004
            (e) through (r), see enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction:

   1.1. Implements policy and assigns responsibility, under reference (a), for managing real
property.

    1.2. Re-delegates various statutory and regulatory authorities and responsibilities relating to
real property management.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

This Instruction applies to:

    2.1. The Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military Departments (including
their Reserve components), the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense
(hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

   2.2. All DoD real property holdings except:


                                                 1
                                                                     DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005



       2.2.1. Civil works projects (unless relating to mineral exploration and extraction).

     2.2.2. The acquisition and management of defense industrial plants that are governed by
DoD Directive 4275.5 (reference (b)).


3. DEFINITIONS

   3.1. Military Department. In accordance with DoD Directive 5110.4 (reference (c)), for
purposes of the Pentagon Reservation, Washington Headquarters Services shall be considered a
Military Department and its Director the secretary thereof.

    3.2. Predominant User. The DoD Component whose activities comprise the predominant
use of an installation, as measured by expenditures for operations, relative number of personnel,
using the largest quantity or unit of measured space, and other mission-related metrics.


4. POLICY

This Instruction implements policy established in reference (a) regarding the management of real
property.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

   5.1. The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Installations and Environment) (DUSD(I&E)),
under the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
(USD(AT&L)):

        5.1.1. Shall provide additional guidance and procedures, as required, for implementing
real property management policy and this Instruction.

        5.1.2. Shall serve as the Senior Real Property Officer for the Department of Defense in
accordance with Executive Order 13327 (reference (d)). In his or her absence or unavailability,
the Principal Assistant Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Installations and Environment) may
represent the Department of Defense on the Federal Real Property Council.

       5.1.3. Is hereby re-delegated, with authority to re-delegate, all those authorities and
responsibilities delegated or re-delegated, as the case may be, to the USD(AT&L) under
subparagraph 5.1.3. of reference (a) that relate to the management (including mineral exploration
and extraction) of real property.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                            2
                                                                      DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005



   5.2. The Heads of DoD Components shall:

        5.2.1. Maintain an accurate and current inventory of those real property facilities in
which they are the sole user or over which they exercise management responsibility and provide
this data to the military department exercising real property accountability for the facility.


         5.2.2. Provide inventory and other information requested by the Military Departments to
assist them in managing the real property used by the DoD Component.

        5.2.3. In accordance with applicable policy, procedures, and guidance, reimburse the
costs of the Military Department in managing the real property used by the DoD Component.

        5.2.4. Except as otherwise provided by law or unless specified differently in this or other
DoD publications, pay all costs, whether direct or indirect, resulting from their use of real
property facilities. Such costs include, without limitation, maintenance, repair, construction,
environmental compliance, environmental restoration, historic and cultural preservation,
security, fire protection, utilities, and demolition/disposal.

   5.3. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

       5.3.1. Establish programs and procedures to manage real property that conform with
applicable law and to the policies, guidance, and procedures provided by and pursuant to
reference (a) and this Instruction.

        5.3.2. Accurately inventory and account for the real property under their accountability
for the purpose of providing the basis for future justifications of capitalization improvements for
the real property.

        5.3.3. Assign a unique non-intelligent Real Property Unique Identifier, from the
Department of Defense Real Property Unique Identifier Registry, to all real property assets. A
real property asset is a land parcel or facility. The Real Property Unique Identifier shall be
assigned to the real property asset, not the organization, owner, or manager. The Real Property
Unique Identifier will be assigned when the Department of Defense acquires a legal interest in
the real property asset. The Real Property Unique Identifier will remain associated with the asset
perpetually. After the Department of Defense has relinquished all interest in the asset, the Real
Property Unique Identifier will be archived along with all the associated attributes.

         5.3.4. Assign a unique non-intelligent Real Property Site Unique Identifier from the
Department of Defense Real Property Site Unique Identifier Registry, to all real property sites.
A real property site is a specific geographic location that has individual land parcels and/or
facilities assigned to it. The Real Property Site Unique Identifier will be assigned when the
Department of Defense acquires a legal interest in the first real property asset (land parcel or
facility) assigned to the site. The Real Property Site Unique Identifier will remain associated
with the site perpetually. After the Department of Defense has relinquished all interest in the



Change 1, 08/31/2018                             3
                                                                       DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005


site, the Real Property Site Unique Identifier will be archived along with all the associated
attributes.

       5.3.5. Maintain a program monitoring the use of real property to ensure that all real
property holdings under their control are being used to the maximum extent possible consistent
with both peacetime and mobilization requirements.

       5.3.6. As appropriate, delegate to another DoD Component, for those installations under
the management responsibility of that DoD Component, authority and responsibility for some or
all management functions other than those reserved to an agency that can hold real property
accountability.


6. PROCEDURES

    6.1. Planning. Base master plans or comprehensive plans shall be developed for all
installations. Such plans shall:

        6.1.1. Be developed by the DoD Component having management responsibility for the
installation.

        6.1.2. Be based on a strategic assessment of the operational mission and expected use of
the installation.

       6.1.3. Cover at least a 10-year period and be updated every 5 years (more often if
necessary).

       6.1.4. Include a specific, annual listing of all construction to include military
construction, military family housing, nonappropriated fund construction, commissary surcharge
construction, appropriated fund construction for a non-DoD agency, and construction privately
financed over the time period covered by the plan.

        6.1.5. Include a specific, annual listing of all major repair and sustainment projects, as
well as restoration and modernization projects needed within the time period covered by the
plan.

       6.1.6.. Include current and projected peacetime as well as mobilization requirements.

   6.2. Outgranting.

       6.2.1. Outgrants shall:

           6.2.1.1. Always be documented and signed by persons having statutory or actual
delegated authority to bind the Government for the outgrant being made.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                              4
                                                                       DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005


            6.2.1.2. Take the form of any legally authorized outgrant, including, without
limitation, leases, licenses, permits, easements, and rights-of-way.

            6.2.1.3. Be accomplished by obtaining at least fair market value except when the
applicable statute authorizes payment of less then fair market value and accepting less is in the
best interest of the Government. If acceptance of in-kind consideration is authorized, consider
whether the in-kind consideration, in lieu of cash, would be more beneficial to the Department of
Defense.

           6.2.1.4. Be compatible with any current or projected military requirements.

           6.2.1.5. Encourage multiple and compatible land uses.

           6.2.1.6. Reduce maintenance and custody costs to the Department of Defense.

           6.2.1.7. Not generate the need for real property acquisitions.

            6.2.1.8. Include provisions requiring the grantee to obtain prior written approval
before allowing another party to exercise the rights and privileges authorized directly or
indirectly by the outgrant.

          6.2.1.9. Be consistent with regulations issued by the installation commander
governing access pursuant to DoD Directive 5200.8 (reference (e)).

       6.2.2. The Military Departments are encouraged to use the enhanced leasing authority
under Section 2667 of title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (reference (f)), when it is beneficial.

       6.2.3. Unimproved lands (e.g., buffer, safety, restrictive, or maneuver areas) or real
property may be made available for outgrant when interim usage will not interfere with or will
support the purpose for which the Department of Defense holds the real property.

         6.2.4. In establishing the terms for leasing property to States, commonwealths,
territories, or their political subdivisions for public school purposes specifically limited to school
facilities, classroom, and closely related academic uses at the high school level or below for
military dependents, the Secretary concerned, after consulting with the Department of Education,
may consider actual or potential benefits to the Military Department but should assure full cash
reimbursement for maintenance, services, utilities, protection, repair, and restoration costs
(including environmental restoration) of the property and related administrative costs. Where
bare land is leased for school construction, the acreage shall not exceed criteria established by
the appropriate State authority or the Department of Education for the particular type of school.
Permits for such purposes may also be issued to the Department of Education at no charge.

        6.2.5. All proposed outleasing actions (regardless of grantee or consideration) are subject
to the appropriate level of analysis required by the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
(reference (g)) and implementing regulations.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                              5
                                                                      DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005


        6.2.6. Applications for outgrants affecting land or water uses in the coastal zone of a
State shall include a certification that the proposed activity is consistent to the maximum extent
practicable with the federally approved, enforceable provisions of state coastal zone management
programs pursuant to the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (reference (h)).

   6.3. Retention Reviews. The DoD Components shall periodically review their real property
holdings, both land and facilities, to identify unneeded and underused property.

       6.3.1. In deciding whether or not to retain real property, the DoD Components shall
consider:

           6.3.1.1. The property is being used effectively, is necessary to satisfy current or
projected peacetime needs, or is needed to meet mobilization or legal requirements.

            6.3.1.2. The DoD Component Head has determined that the property is essential to
protect future mission flexibility, operational changes, changes in equipment types, mobilization
for a national security emergency, or for research or development of future defense or weapons
systems.

           6.3.1.3. The requirement for the property can be met by using other property at less
cost providing equal or better working and operating conditions.

           6.3.1.4. The property is used as a buffer zone and is still required for that purpose.

           6.3.1.5. The land is an internal parcel and access to it would disrupt installation
operations or violate security requirements (although the building or facility may be excess if
moved offsite or demolished).

            6.3.1.6. The cost of declaring real property excess (because of new fencing, utilities,
roads, replacement buildings, decontamination, or other factors) is likely to exceed the market
value.

            6.3.1.7. The property is affected by security or safety restrictions including quantity
safety, distance safety arcs, radiation safety zones, Air Installation Compatible Use Zones, Range
Air Installation Compatible Use Zones, potential encroachments, radio interference zones, or
specifically designated security areas.

       6.3.2. Real property for which there is no foreseeable military requirement, either in
peacetime or during mobilization, shall first be offered to the other DoD Components for their
possible use.

             6.3.2.1. The Military Department that holds real property accountability for the
property shall notify the other Military Departments, the Combatant Commands, the Defense
Agencies, and the DoD Field Activities of the availability of the property.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                             6
                                                                       DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005


             6.3.2.2. The DoD Components notified pursuant to subparagraph 6.3.2.1., above,
shall have 60 days from the date of notification to advise the holding Military Department of
their requirement for the property.

              6.3.2.3. If the holding Military Department does not receive, within such 60 days, a
firm commitment from another Military Department to take real property accountability for the
property or a firm commitment from a Combatant Command, a Defense Agency, or a DoD Field
Activity that it requires the property, the holding Military Department may proceed with
disposal. A Combatant Command, a Defense Agency, or a DoD Field Activity that is supported
by a specific Military Department for its real property requirements shall communicate its
requirements through that Military Department.

    6.4. Inventory of Real Property. The Military Departments shall keep accurate records of
the real property of the Department of Defense under their jurisdiction, custody, and control
pursuant to 10 U.S.C. 2721 (reference (i)), and in accordance with DoD Instruction 4165.14
(reference (j)). The Military Department having real property accountability for a joint
installation or leased facility will include that property in their inventory data. Real Property
administrators, as designated by reference (d), shall be accountable for the following:

        6.4.1. Maintaining a current inventory count and up to date information regarding the
cost, functional use, status, condition, utilization, present value, maintenance and management,
recapitalization investments, and remaining useful life of each individual real property unit in
their real property inventory. Department inventory counts and associated information will be
current as of the last day of each fiscal year. In accordance with subparagraphs 5.2.1. and 5.2.2.,
a DoD Component using real property will provide accurate and current inventory information to
the accountable Military Department.

       6.4.2. A complete detailed inventory will be prepared annually and made available as a
reference for use in developing and effectuating DoD policies, plans, and programs.

        6.4.3. Accumulating the full cost of maintenance and repair, use, and operation of their
real property space, to include all direct and indirect costs.

       6.4.4. Computing the unit costs of space maintenance, operation, and utilization based on
designated management metrics for space operation, for the purpose of providing unit cost
measures to program managers for the formulation and justification of program and performance
plans and budgets.

       6.4.5. Recovering the full cost of space utilization from Department of Defense and other
Federal agencies in accordance with subparagraph 5.2.4., above.

        6.4.6. Providing the basis for justifying future costing of real property acquisition or re-
capitalized requirements and for justifying capitalization of improvements deemed to be
required.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                              7
                                                                     DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005


    6.5. Priority of Use of Real Property. Military Departments shall use the following priorities
when assigning available space on their installations. They may make exceptions to these
priorities when they determine it is in the best interests of the Department of Defense to do so.

        6.5.1. Appropriated fund activities of the DoD Component serving as host at the
installation and non-DoD entities which directly support the host’s mission on the installation.

        6.5.2. Non-appropriated fund activities of the DoD Component serving as host at the
installation.

     6.5.3. Other DoD Components and non-DoD entities which support the mission of the
DoD Component serving as host at the installation.

       6.5.4. Other DoD Components.

       6.5.5. Other Federal Agencies whose mission on the installation is closely associated
with the national defense mission.

       6.5.6. Other Federal Agencies.

        6.5.7. Non-Federal governmental entities, with preference given to State governmental
entities.

       6.5.8. All others.


       6.6. Force Protection. All facilities shall attempt to meet the DoD antiterrorism
standards in DoD Instruction 2000.16 (reference (k)).

           6.6.1. Relocations from leaseholds or otherwise should only be to facilities, whether
owned or leased, that meet the standards of reference (k).

             6.6.2. Antiterrorism standards shall be a key consideration when evaluating the
suitability of a facility.

   6.7. Leaseholds.

         6.7.1. When possible, each DoD Component shall take prompt action to relocate
activities accommodated in leased building space into Government-owned facilities, preferably
located on a military installation, and to dispose of excess leaseholds.

        6.7.2. Public release of proposals for relocations into or within the Washington D.C. area
that exceed $500,000 in relocation costs requires the prior approval of the Secretary of Defense
or Deputy Secretary of Defense in accordance with the Secretary of Defense Memorandum dated
November 17, 2002 (reference (l)).




Change 1, 08/31/2018                             8
                                                                       DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005


          6.7.2.1. Requests for approval shall be submitted to the Director, Washington
Headquarters Services, who shall submit such requests to the USD(AT&L).

           6.7.2.2. The Washington D.C. area is defined as the geographic area that falls within
100 miles of the Pentagon.

            6.7.2.3. Public release includes any public announcement, request for proposals,
notice of intent to perform environmental analysis, request for legislation or budget line item,
press release, or other official notice.

    6.8. Charges for Use of Space. Except as otherwise provided by law or unless specified
differently in this or other DoD publications, the host shall assess charges for use of DoD space
by other Federal Agencies that ensure full recovery of all direct and indirect costs including,
without limitation, maintenance, repair, construction, environmental compliance, environmental
restoration, historic and cultural preservation, security, fire protection, utilities and
demolition/disposal provided to the tenant agency. Exceptions are:

        6.8.1. Real property and related services provided to an organization that solely supports
or substantially benefits the installation’s mission or enhances the national defense (e.g., the
Federal Aviation Administration Air Controller on an air base, the United States Forest Service
for timber programs, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for tidal wave
monitoring devices, the Weather Service for weather stations, the Coast Guard for installation
harbor protection, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for space launch support,
or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service for preventing transport or introduction of
invasive species by military transportation).

        6.8.2. Use of DoD land where the activity being conducted on the property significantly
benefits or enhances the national defense.

       6.8.3. When the income produced by a charge is less than the expense of administering
the charge.

    6.9. Use of Space for Political Purposes. Installations shall not engage in, nor allow their
tenant activities to engage in, activities that could be interpreted as associating the installation
with any partisan political causes, issues, or candidates. The DoD Components shall not permit
the use of installation facilities by any candidates (either incumbents or new office seekers),
members of their staffs, or their campaign representatives for political campaigns, parties, or
causes (regardless of sponsorship), press conferences, or any other activity that could be
construed as partisan in nature.

   6.10. Annexation. Determinations regarding proposals to annex a DoD installation shall be
made by the Military Department having real property accountability for the installation.

      6.10.1. The Department of Defense will be neutral relative to annexation proposals by a
municipality or political subdivision acting in accordance with State law, unless the Secretary




Change 1, 08/31/2018                              9
                                                                       DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005


concerned determines that such action would not be in the best interest of the Federal
Government.

       6.10.2. If the installation host is not also the Military Department having real property
accountability for the installation, the installation host shall immediately forward any annexation
proposal it receives or becomes aware of to that Military Department.

       6.10.3. The Military Department having real property accountability will review the
annexation proposal and any associated information and determine whether it should object to
the proposal.

           6.10.3.1. In those States where State law requires that an annexation proposal receive
an affirmative determination from the Department of Defense, the Military Department shall
make a determination based on the best interests of the Department of Defense.

           6.10.3.2. Factors to be considered include, without limitation, potential extension of
taxing authority to private entities on the installation, local zoning implications, and changes in
school boundaries.

    6.11. Changes in Federal Legislative Jurisdiction. Determinations regarding changes in
Federal legislative jurisdiction on a DoD installation will be made pursuant to 10 U.S.C. 2683
(reference (m)) by the Military Department having real property accountability for the
installation.

        6.11.1. The Military Department having real property accountability for an installation
should seek to have a single uniform Federal legislative jurisdiction throughout the installation
unless there are compelling reasons to retain differing jurisdictions.

           6.11.1.1. Privatized military family housing areas will normally be proprietary
Federal legislative jurisdiction, without regard to the status of the supported installation.

           6.11.1.2. Lands withdrawn for military purposes from national forest lands will
normally retain their existing Federal legislative jurisdiction status without regard to the
remainder of the installation.

        6.11.2. While it is the general policy of the United States to obtain no more than
proprietary Federal legislative jurisdiction over its property, the type of Federal legislative
jurisdiction at any particular installation will be determined based on the individual merits of that
location.

        6.11.3. Before proposing to the State a change in Federal legislative jurisdiction, the
Military Department shall consult with the United States Attorney in whose district the
installation is located and the General Litigation and Legal Advice Section, Criminal Division,
U.S. Department of Justice.




Change 1, 08/31/2018                             10
                                                                     DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005


    6.12. Maximum Use of Installation Resources. The DoD Components shall promote cross
service and joint use of installations and facilities to achieve efficient customer service in
overhead, support areas, and common logistical functions.

        6.12.1. The predominant user will normally be designated as the host at joint-use
installations.

        6.12.2. Designations of host that cannot be settled by the DoD Components shall be
referred to the DUSD(I&E) for resolution. Designation of host responsibilities involving
Reserve components shall be coordinated by the DUSD(I&E) with the Principal Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs.

    6.13. Conservation of Natural and Cultural Resources. All installations shall manage natural
and cultural resources, land, and water areas in accordance with DoD Instruction 4715.3
(reference(n).).

   6.14. Mineral Exploration and Extraction. The Military Departments shall identify potential
minerals and energy resources (e.g., coal, oil, gas, geothermal steam) on DoD lands in
accordance with 30 U.S.C. (reference (o)).

        6.14.1. DoD property holdings shall be made available for mineral exploration and
extraction to the maximum extent consistent with military operations, national defense activities,
environmental conservation and protection, and Army civil works activities. Excluded are:

           6.14.1.1. Certain hard rock minerals known as locatable minerals.

           6.14.1.2. Minerals composed of sand and gravel known as saleable materials.

           6.14.1.3. Lands situated within incorporated cities, towns, and villages.

           6.14.1.4. Tidelands or submerged lands.

        6.14.2. If a commercial oil and gas resource development is discovered near a DoD
installation, the installation shall immediately contact the Bureau of Land Management,
Department of the Interior, to advise of potential drainage problems. To prevent exploitation of
a Government asset, and upon the recommendation of the Bureau of Land Management, the
Department of the Interior may lease oil and gas rights under conditions specified by the Military
Department concerned.

   6.15. Federal Employee Parking at GSA Facilities. The DoD Components shall comply
with title 41, Code of Federal Regulations, sections 102-74.265 through 310 (reference (p)) for
Government-owned and leased property under GSA control.

    6.16. Base Realignment Announcements. At least 30 days before making any public release
of information relating to a base closure or realignment under 10 U.S.C. 2687 (reference (q)), a




Change 1, 08/31/2018                            11
                                                                     DoDI 4165.70, April 6, 2005


copy of the closure or realignment information to be publicly released shall be provided to the
DUSD(I&E) and the DoD Component concerned.

    6.17. Pre-Designation of Facilities for Emergency Requirements. To ensure that the Military
Departments have access to sufficient housing, training, and other facilities needed to respond
effectively to mobilization surges and other major national emergencies, the Military
Departments shall, in accordance with Executive Order 12656 (reference (r)):

         6.17.1. Develop plans, programs, and procedures for selecting and predesignating
facilities to meet emergency requirements.

         6.17.2. Identify supplemental facility requirements, including the conditions and extent
of facility use.

        6.17.3. Request facility assignments by applying to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) regional director in the area in which the facility is located. The regional
director shall coordinate such requests with other Federal agencies and State and local
emergency planners and resolve any conflicts in facility designations.

       6.17.4. Arrange for formal agreement with a facility owner or operator once FEMA has
approved the pre-designation of a facility.

        6.17.5. Maintain records on the assignment and planned use of pre-designated facilities
to help evaluate emergency preparedness capabilities.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (s)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 1
   E1. References, continued




Change 1, 08/31/2018                            12
                                     E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                  REFERENCES, continued

(e) DoD Directive 5200.8, “Security of DoD Installations and Resources,” April 25, 1991
(f) Section 2667 of title 10, United States Code
(g) Section 4321 of title 42, United States Code
(h) Section 1451 of title 16, United States Code
(i) Section 2721 of title 10, United States Code
(j) DoD Instruction 4165.14, “Inventory of Military Real Property,” December 21, 1966
(k) DoD Instruction 2000.16, “DoD Antiterrorism Standards,” June 14, 2001
(l) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Land Acquisition and Leasing of Office Space in the
    United States,” November 17, 2002
(m) Section 2683 of title 10, United States Code
(n) DoD Instruction 4715.3, “Environmental Conservation Program,” May 3, 1996(n)
(o) Title 30, United States Code
(p) Part 102 of Title 41, Code of Federal Regulations
(q) Section 2687 of title 10, United States Code
(r) Executive Order 12656, “Assignment of Emergency Preparedness Responsibilities”
    November 18, 1988, as amended
(s) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary of
    Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018




Change 1, 08/31/2018                          13                              ENCLOSURE 1
