                               Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 1010.01
                                                                             September 13, 2012
                                                          Incorporating Change 2, August 21, 2025

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Military Personnel Drug Abuse Testing Program

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 1010.1 (Reference (a)) as a DoD instruction (DoDI) in
accordance with the authority in DoDD 5124.02 (Reference (b)).

   b. Updates established policy and assigned responsibilities of the Military Personnel Drug
Abuse Testing Program (MPDATP). MPDATP guidance is provided in Enclosure 2.

    c. Realigns responsibilities for drug detection and deterrence policy, education, and
oversight in accordance with the policy in DoDD 1010.4 (Reference (c)). Technical guidance for
the Forensic Drug Testing Laboratories is provided in DoDI 1010.16 (Reference (d)).

   d. Incorporates and cancels the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and
Low Intensity Conflict memorandum (Reference (e)).

    e. Issues guidance on the conduct of prevalence testing and the use of data from urinalysis
testing to conduct demographic longitudinal, statistical, and analytical studies assessing the
extent of drug abuse among military personnel within DoD.


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD. The term “Military Services” as used herein, refers to the
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Active and Reserve Components.

    b. Does not encompass testing in direct support of criminal investigations or clinical
diagnostic procedures.
                                                              DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012




3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

   a. Establish drug testing laboratories and a drug testing program to deter and detect drug
misuse among Service members.

    b. Permit commanders to use drug testing to detect drug abuse and to assess the security,
military fitness, readiness, and good order and discipline of their commands.

     c. Implement urinalysis drug testing to deter Service members, including those members on
initial entry on active duty from misusing drugs (including pharmaceutical medications, illegal
drugs, and other substances of abuse).

   d. Process all Service members who knowingly misuse drugs for separation in accordance
with applicable Service regulations. The established drug testing program shall enable
commanders to take action, adverse or otherwise (including referral for treatment), as
appropriate.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. The changes to this instruction are administrative and update
language to comply with Executive Order 14168 (Reference (f)).




Change 2, 08/21/2025                            2
                                                        DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective September 13, 2012.




                                            Erin C. Conaton
                                            Under Secretary of Defense for
                                            Personnel and Readiness

Enclosures:
   1. References
   2. MPDATP Guidance
   3. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 2, 08/21/2025                        3
                                                                                            DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................5

ENCLOSURE 2: MPDATP GUIDANCE ......................................................................................6

ENCLOSURE 3: RESPONSIBILITIES .......................................................................................11

     ASD(R) ....................................................................................................................................11
     SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS......................................................11
     COMMANDER, USMEPCOM ...............................................................................................12

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................13

     PART I: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................13
     PART II: DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................13




Change 2, 08/21/2025                                                   4                                                      CONTENTS
                                                                  DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


                                              ENCLOSURE 1

                                               REFERENCES


(a)     DoD Directive 1010.1, “Military Personnel Drug Abuse Testing Program,” December 9,
        1994 (hereby cancelled)
(b)     DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
        (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c)     DoD Instruction 1010.04, “Problematic Substance Use by DoD Personnel,” February 20,
        2014
(d)     DoD Instruction 1010.16, “Technical Procedures for the Military Personnel Drug Abuse
        Testing Program (MPDATP),” October 10, 2012, as amended
(e)     Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low Intensity Conflict
        Memorandum, “Department Drug Demand Reduction Policy,” October 1, 2003 (hereby
        cancelled)
(f)     Executive Order 14168, “Defending Women from Gender Ideology Extremism and
        Resorting Biological Truth to the Federal Government,” January 20, 2025
(g)     Sections 801-940 1 and 978 of Title 10, United States Code
(h)     Sections 802 and 812 of Title 21, United States Code
(i)     Military Rules of Evidence 311-317, Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, current
        edition
(j)     DoD Instruction 6055.07, “Mishap Notification, Investigation, Reporting, and
        Recordkeeping,” June 6, 2011
(k)     National Criminal Information Center 2000 Code Manual, Federal Bureau of Investigation
        Criminal Justice Information Services, August 1, 2010
(l)     Section 922(g)(3) of Title 18, United States Code
(m)     DoD Instruction 5505.11, “Fingerprint Card and Final Disposition Report Submission
        Requirements,” July 21, 2014, as amended
(n)     Section 290dd-2 of Title 42, United States Code
(o)     Section 552a 2 of Title 5, United States Code
(p)     DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: DoD Internal
        Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(q)     DoD Directive 1145.02E, “United States Military Entrance Processing Command
        (USMEPCOM),” October 18, 2012
(r)     DoD Instruction 1332.14, “Enlisted Administrative Separations,” January 27, 2014, as
        amended
(s)     DoD Instruction 1332.30, “Separation of Regular and Reserve Commissioned Officers,”
        November 25, 2013, as amended




1
    Also known as “The Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ)”
2
    Also known as “The Privacy Act of 1974,” as amended


Change 2, 08/21/2025                                   5                           ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                      MPDATP GUIDANCE


1. This mandatory program guidance is provided for the implementation, management, and
oversight of the MPDATP.

   a. Mandatory drug testing will be implemented as follows:

       (1) Service applicants will be tested for drug use and will be evaluated for dependency
within 72 hours after initial entry on active duty pursuant to section 978 of title 10, United States
Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (g)).

       (2) Mandatory drug testing of new military entrants from the delayed entry program shall
be conducted within 72 hours of entering active duty.

        (3) Reserve Component members not entering extended active duty shall be tested no
later than 72 hours after the beginning of the first scheduled annual training or initial active duty
training.

      (4) Appointees to Service academies will be tested within 72 hours of reporting to an
academy.

       (5) Reserve Officer Training Corps cadets and midshipmen shall be tested during their
commissioning physical examination pursuant to section 978 of Reference (g) and individual
Service policy.

    b. All Service members and applicants shall be tested for the drugs listed in Reference (d).
Testing of Service members for other drugs will be pursuant to Reference (d) or as prescribed by
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness (ASD(R)).

    c. Urine specimens collected as part of the drug abuse testing program shall be supported by
a proper chain of custody procedure at the collection site, during transport, and at the drug testing
laboratory (Reference (d)).

    d. Service members and military service applicant specimens shall be tested by a DoD-
certified drug testing laboratory, except as permitted by Reference (d). Field testing, hand-held,
or point of collection testing devices are not authorized.

    e. Illicit possession or use of controlled substances by Service members as listed by sections
802 and 812 of title 21, U.S.C. (Reference (h)), including anabolic steroids, synthetic
cannabinoids and other designer drug products, constitutes an offense under sections 801-940 of
Reference (g) (also known and referred to in this issuance as “The Uniform Code of Military
Justice (UCMJ)”) and subjects the member to actions pursuant to Reference (g).




Change 2, 08/21/2025                              6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


    f. The Military Department designated by Secretary of Defense or Deputy Secretary
memorandum, or DoD directive as the “DoD Executive Agent” of a Joint Service Command
shall oversee drug testing of all assigned Service members. The collection procedures, software,
testing rates, and designated testing laboratories will be defined by the DoD Executive Agent.
When no DoD Executive Agent has been designated, Service members shall comply with their
respective parent echelon command directives.

   g. One of the following collection codes must be used to document the basis for military
drug abuse urine testing:

       (1) Inspection. Inspection collections can be subdivided as:

           (a) Use collection code ‘IU’ for an inspection or examination of an entire unit.

           (b) Use collection code ‘IR’ for a random inspection or examination of an
individual(s) within a unit.

           (c) Use collection code ‘IO’ for inspections or examinations of an individual(s)
pursuant to the Military Rules of Evidence (M.R.E.) 313, Manual for Courts Martial (Reference
(i)).

        (2) Probable Cause. Use collection code ‘PO’ during a probable cause collection search
or seizure when there is reasonable belief that the urine to be collected contains evidence of
illegal drug use, pursuant to the M.R.E. 315 of Reference (i).

        (3) Consent. Use collection code ‘VO’ when a Service member voluntarily agrees to
participates in urine collection as part of a consent search pursuant to the M.R.E. 314(e) of
Reference (i).

       (4) Rehabilitation. Use collection code ‘RO’ for collections conducted during a Service
member’s participation in a drug treatment and rehabilitation program, as prescribed by the
Military Department.

        (5) Safety Mishap. Use collection code ‘AO’ for collections following any incident
considered a safety mishap under the regulations of the Service involved. Except as provided in
subparagraph 1.h.(1)(b) of this enclosure, a specimen may be collected from any individual
directly or indirectly involved with the incident. Such samples collected may be used for any
lawful purpose, including but not limited to:

           (a) Use consistent with applicable M.R.E. (Reference (i));

           (b) Disciplinary action under the UCMJ; or

           (c) Inclusion as independently collected evidence in a safety mishap investigation or
other investigations.




Change 2, 08/21/2025                            7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


        (6) Command-Directed. Use collection code ‘CO’ during a command-directed
examination of a Service member to determine the Service member’s competence for duty or the
need for counseling, rehabilitation, or other medical treatment when the commander has reason
to question the Service member’s competence for duty (e.g., aberrant, bizarre, or uncharacteristic
behavior; unauthorized absences; violations of safety regulations; breaches of discipline; or other
similar behavior).

       (7) Medical. Use collection code ‘MO’ for urine collections pursuant to M.R.E. 312,
Reference (i) procured during any examination for a valid medical purpose, such as emergency
treatment, periodic physical examinations, and such other medical examinations as necessary for
diagnostic or treatment purposes.

       (8) New Entrant. Use collection code ‘NO’ when a collection is provided during the pre-
accession physical or initial period of military service (including a Reserve Component). The
policy on pre-accession or new entrant drug testing and dependency evaluation is in section 978
of Reference (g).

       (9) Other. Use collection code ‘OO’ for collections conducted under other
circumstances, as allowed by Reference (i).

    h. The use of an approved military drug abuse testing result is permitted in the following
circumstances for the stated purposes provided.

        (1) Urinalysis results may be used as evidence in disciplinary actions under the UCMJ,
and in administrative actions (including separation from the Military Service), except when:

            (a) A Service member voluntarily submits to a DoD treatment and rehabilitation
program (before the receipt of an order to appear for a urinalysis) or the urinalysis is
administered as an integral part of the rehabilitation program. This limitation does not apply to,
or prohibit the use of, the urinalysis results:

              1. As required for national security, such as suspension and processing for
removal of access to classified information or retention in a sensitive position; or

                2. For non-punitive or administrative action, including separation for drug abuse
if the Service member is considered a rehabilitation failure or if information substantiates
continued drug abuse after initial entry into the treatment or rehabilitation program. Separation
based on such records must be in accordance with DoDI 1332.14 (Reference (r)) and
DoDI 1332.30 (Reference (s)).

            (b) In certain safety investigations, a safety investigator has given a promise of
confidentiality to an individual who provides evidence for the investigation to encourage frank or
open communications. The privileged safety information shall not be used to support
disciplinary or adverse administrative action, to determine the misconduct or line-of-duty status
of any personnel, or as evidence before any evaluation board. Uses of privileged safety
information shall be in accordance with DoDI 6055.07 (Reference (j)).



Change 2, 08/21/2025                             8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012



            (c) A Service member is tested for possible drug use as part of a command-directed
urinalysis, as in subparagraph 1.g.(6) of this enclosure. Results of a command-directed
urinalysis test may be used as a basis for administrative action, including separation, but shall not
be used as the basis for an action under the UCMJ or be considered in the issue of
characterization of service in a separation proceeding.

           (d) A Service member is tested for a controlled substance for which he or she has a
valid prescription from a licensed medical authority and has taken the substance pursuant to the
prescription and the licensed medical authority’s direction.

       (2) The limitations in subparagraphs 1.h.(1)(a) through (c) of this enclosure shall not
apply when urinalysis results are used as evidence for impeachment or rebuttal purposes in any
administrative or disciplinary proceeding in which the Service member first introduces the
evidence (or lack of evidence) of drug abuse.

       (3) Disqualification of military service applicants based on a positive urinalysis result
must follow guidance in section 978 of Reference (g).

       (4) This instruction is not intended to prohibit the Government from using, as rebuttal,
urinalysis testing data that show the presence of controlled substances, although not in a
concentration sufficient to meet the cutoff level for a positive result that has been established in
Reference (d) or updated by memorandum from ASD(R). This provision is specifically intended
to permit the Government to use such results in rebuttal to explain, contradict, dispel, or disprove
evidence first produced by a Service member that indicates or implies that the test results show
the member did not use controlled substances.

        (5) Controlled substance abuse, as defined in the Glossary, will be reported in
accordance with the National Criminal Information Center (NCIC) 2000 Code Manual
(Reference (k)), in support of section 922(g)(3) of title 18, U.S.C. (Reference (l)) and other law
enforcement purposes. Relevant Service member data will be entered into the Federal Bureau of
Investigation’s National Criminal Information Center database as an “abuser of drugs” when a
positive urinalysis test for a controlled substance is received. For purposes of this paragraph, a
positive urinalysis result is one: (a) that is above the applicable cut-off for the given controlled
substance; and (b) for which the Service member does not have a valid medical or other lawful
use that would explain the positive result. This constitutes probable cause for a violation of
possession or use of a controlled substance (Reference (h)) and Article 112a of the UCMJ
(Reference (g)). Probable cause may also be established by other evidence of wrongful
possession or use of a controlled substance. Such results are reportable to NCIC in accordance
with DoDI 5505.11 (Reference (m)).

2. Records of the identity, diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment of any rehabilitant that are
maintained in the performance of any drug abuse rehabilitation program conducted, regulated, or
directly or indirectly assisted by any U.S. Government department or agency may not be used to
initiate or substantiate any criminal charges against the rehabilitant or used as a basis for any
investigation of a Service member in the DoD Rehabilitation Program. Exceptions include a



Change 2, 08/21/2025                             9                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


court order issued pursuant to section 290dd-2 of title 42, U.S.C. (Reference (n)) and as allowed
in subparagraph l. h.(2) of this enclosure.

3. Urinalysis specimens and resulting test data may be used to prepare demographic reports,
conduct longitudinal, statistical, and analytical studies of drug use among military personnel.

    a. Demographic data reports on drug testing shall not contain personal identifiers.
Demographic data reports on drug testing may contain information on age, sex, rank/grade
and/or rate, specialty/job title, geographic location, Military Service, or DoD Component, and
related demographic information on active duty military personnel, members of the Reserve and
members of the National Guard Bureau.

    b. All requests for Service-specific drug testing demographics data shall be submitted to the
Service’s designated drug testing program office for approval. All requests for DoD-wide drug
testing demographic data shall be submitted to ASD(R).

    c. Military drug test results are subject to the requirements of section 552a of title 5, U.S.C.
(also known as “The Privacy Act of 1974,” as amended (Reference (o)). Where drug test
information involves individuals participating in a drug abuse rehabilitation program, results of
testing shall be confidential and be disclosed only for purposes and under the circumstances
expressly authorized in section 290dd-2 of Reference (n).

   d. Longitudinal studies are permitted to use drug testing reports to determine the extent of
drug abuse, to evaluate emergent drug use, and to analyze the demographics of drug abuse
among Service members.

    e. Prevalence testing is permitted within the MPDATP drug testing laboratories to monitor
the use of illicit drugs that are not on the current drug testing panel. When authorized by the
Director, DoD Drug Testing and Program Policy (DDTPP), a MPDATP certified laboratory may
periodically retain negative urine samples slated for destruction and conduct blinded prevalence
testing for emerging drug threats. Results of individual member samples used in the prevalence
studies shall not be released to the submitting unit, command, or Service. Data summaries,
reports, or recommendations shall not contain personal identifiers. Results of prevalence studies,
along with recommendations, will be forwarded through the Biochemical Testing Advisory
Board to the Director, DDTPP, for review in support of any changes by the ASD(R) pursuant to
Reference (d).

   f. Targeted and periodic surveys will be conducted in accordance with Volume 1 of DoD
Manual 8910.01 (Reference (p)) to document changes in drug use habits, demographic patterns,
and drug preferences to facilitate the development of DoD MPDATP policy and guidance.




Change 2, 08/21/2025                             10                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASD(R). The ASD(R), under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), through the Director, Personnel Risk and
Resiliency, will:

   a. Develop policy on the deterrence and detection of drug abuse.

   b. Develop the procedures and standards for the technical aspects of the MPDATP.

    c. Maintain a certification and inspection program for DoD-certified drug testing
laboratories.

   d. Coordinate with the Commander, United States Military Entrance Processing Command
(USMEPCOM) to ensure that deterrence of drug abuse begins upon entrance to active duty
pursuant to References (d) and (g).

    e. Ensure that members of the Reserve Components (including National Guard) are subject
to drug testing and other deterrent programs.

   f. Ensure that drug abuse reduction policies and regulations are issued to deter drug abuse
upon entrance into the Reserve Components.

   g. Provide an annual report to the Secretary of Defense regarding illicit and prescription drug
abuse in the Military Services in accordance with References (p).


2. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

    a. Operate forensic drug testing laboratories with sufficient capacity to meet established
testing requirements.

    b. Test urine specimens collected from Service members or applicants, regardless of the
urine donor’s Service affiliation.

   c. Issue guidance to maintain a forensic drug testing program based upon a computerized
random selection of all Service members.

    d. Ensure all Service members will be tested, at a minimum, once annually. However, more
frequent testing is recommended and encouraged as an effective means to detect drug use.




Change 2, 08/21/2025                            11                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


   e. Issue guidance and establish a mechanism for tracking and processing for military
separation those Service members identified for abuse or misuse pursuant to this instruction.

    f. Issue guidance authorizing command sponsorship and the participation of Service
members and their families in community outreach anti-drug awareness and education programs
in schools, local sporting events, and other community activities formally associated, with
military installations. Such programs must have objective measures of effectiveness.

    g. Issue guidance regarding participation in national anti-drug campaigns, such as the
National Family Partnership’s Red Ribbon Week, that encourage Service members, families, and
citizens to lead healthy, drug-free lifestyles.


3. COMMANDER, USMEPCOM. The Commander, USMEPCOM, as authorized by
DoDD 1145.02E (Reference (q)), shall implement policies that direct the conduct of mandatory
drug testing and evaluation of applicants prior to entering military service as required by
References (d) and (g). Actions pursuant to applicant testing are outlined in Reference (g).




Change 2, 08/21/2025                           12                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 ASD(R)            Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness


 DDTPP             DoD Drug Testing and Program Policy
 DoDD              DoD directive
 DoDI              DoD instruction


 MDA               methylenedioxyamphetamine
 MDMA              methylenedioxymethamphetamine
 MPDATP            Military Personnel Drug Abuse Testing Program
 M.R.E             Military Rules of Evidence


 NCIC              National Criminal Information Center


 UCMJ              Uniform Code of Military Justice
 USD(P&R)          Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
 U.S.C.            United States Code
 USMEPCOM          United States Military Entrance Processing Command


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definition are for the purposes of this instruction.

anabolic steroid. Any drug or hormonal substance, chemically and pharmacologically related to
testosterone. These do not include estrogens, progestins, corticosteroids, and
dehydroepiandrosterone.

analyte. A drug or drug metabolite that will be the object of detection and analysis within the
MPDATP.

blinded prevalence testing. The results of individual member samples used in the prevalence
studies that shall not be released to the submitting unit, command, or Service.

controlled substance. A drug or other substance, or immediate precursor, included in the Drug
Enforcement Administration Schedules I, II, III, IV, or V. The term does not include distilled
spirits, wine, malt beverages, or tobacco.




Change 2, 08/21/2025                             13                                  GLOSSARY
                                                               DoDI 1010.01, September 13, 2012


demographic analysis. Any longitudinal, statistical or data analysis of results of drug testing to
relevant demographic data such as age, sex, educational status, geographic location, etc.

designer amphetamines. Include MDMA and MDA.

designer drug. A controlled substance whose chemical structure and/or physiologic effects on
the central nervous system is substantially similar to the chemical structure of a controlled
substance in Drug Enforcement Administration Schedule I or II.

drug misuse. The use of substance(s) with the intent to alter one’s mental physiological state
(e.g., to alter one’s mood, emotion, or state of consciousness). May include medications, illicit
drugs, or use of a commercial product outside its intended purpose (such as inhalants or synthetic
cannabinoids).

synthetic cannabinoid. A chemical compound which has stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effects on the central nervous system substantially similar to the controlled substance
tetrahydrocannabinol found in marijuana - a Schedule I compound.




Change 2, 08/21/2025                            14                                    GLOSSARY
