                              Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 5100.03
                                                                               February 9, 2011
                                                      Incorporating Change 1, September 7, 2017

                                                                                           DCMO

SUBJECT: Support of the Headquarters of Combatant and Subordinate Unified Commands

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5100.3 (Reference (a)).

   b. Pursuant to section 165 of title 10, United States Code (Reference (b)), establishes policy
and assigns responsibilities for the administrative and logistical support of Combatant Command
headquarters and subordinate unified command headquarters.

   c. Provides a DoD-wide definition of Combatant Command Support Agent (CCSA).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”).

    b. Includes the U.S. Element of the North American Aerospace Defense Command
(USELEMNORAD), although not a Combatant Command, for headquarters administrative and
logistical support purposes only and in accordance with the “Agreement between the
Government of the United States of America and the Government of Canada on the North
American Aerospace Defense Command” (Reference (c)).

   c. Includes the theater special operations commands (TSOCs) listed in Enclosure 3 as
subordinate unified commands.
                                                                 DoDD 5100.03, February 9, 2011


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Administrative and logistical support for the Combatant Command headquarters, the
USELEMNORAD headquarters, and the subordinate unified command headquarters shall be
provided by the CCSA as designated in this Directive, unless otherwise specified. The
responsibilities of the Secretaries of the Military Departments as CCSAs for those commands are
found in Enclosure 2.

   b. The allocation of resources to the Combatant Command headquarters, the
USELEMNORAD headquarters, and the subordinate unified command headquarters shall
conform to the Combatant Command business rules published in Chapter 1 of Volume 2A of
DoD 7000.14-R (Reference (d)), and to DoDD 5105.21 (Reference (e)) and DoDD 5205.12
(Reference (f)).

    c. If changes in law or policy result in a change of support responsibility, the losing Military
Department shall continue to provide, to the extent permitted by law, funded support to the
supported Combatant Command, USELEMNORAD, or subordinate unified command until such
time as the Secretary of Defense transfers the resources to the gaining Military Department. The
losing and gaining Military Departments and the supported Combatant Command shall
coordinate to recommend the baseline resources to be transferred.

   d. Disputes concerning the support of these headquarters shall be elevated through the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense for resolution.

    e. Arrangements for administrative and logistical support of the headquarters of other joint
activities established within a particular Combatant Command shall be resourced through
agreements developed between the Combatant Command and other DoD Components or as
otherwise directed.

    f. Existing inter-Service support agreements, memorandums of agreement, and
memorandums of understanding shall be revised to incorporate the provisions of this Directive to
take effect within 1 year of the publication of this Directive.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 1, 09/07/2017                             2
                                                          DoDD 5100.03, February 9, 2011


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective February 9, 2011.




                                            William J. Lynn III
                                            Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
  1. References
  2. Responsibilities
  3. CCSA List
  Glossary




Change 1, 09/07/2017                        3
                                                                        DoDD 5100.03, February 9, 2011


                                              ENCLOSURE 1

                                              REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5100.3, “Support of the Headquarters of Combatant and Subordinate Joint
      Commands,” November 15, 1999 (hereby cancelled)
(b)   Sections 165 and 167 of title 10, United States Code
(c)   “Agreement between the Government of the United States of America and the Government
      of Canada on the North American Aerospace Defense Command,” April 28, 2006 1
(d)   Volume 2A, Chapter 1 of DoD 7000.14-R, “DoD Financial Management Regulation,”
      October 2008
(e)   DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(f)   DoD Directive 5205.12, “Military Intelligence Program (MIP),” November 14, 2008
(g)   DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major
      Components,” December 21, 2010
(h)   DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Interservice and Intragovernmental Support,” April 25, 2013
(i)   DoD Instruction 5100.73, “Major DoD Headquarters Activities,” December 1, 2007, as
      amended
(j)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Guidance for Developing and Implementing
      the Special Operations Forces Program and Budget,” December 1, 1989
(k)   Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
      Associated Terms,” current edition




1
 Copies may be requested from the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and
Americas’ Security Affairs.


Change 1, 09/07/2017                                   4                                    ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDD 5100.03, February 9, 2011


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, while performing their duties as CCSAs in accordance with Enclosure 3:

    a. Shall provide or arrange for the administrative and logistical support of the headquarters
of the Combatant Commands, the USELEMNORAD, and the subordinate unified commands.

    b. Shall program and budget to fund, without reimbursement, the administrative and
logistical support required by the supported headquarters of the Combatant Commands, the
USELEMNORAD, and the subordinate unified commands, in accordance with References (b)
and (d) and DoDD 5100.1, DoD Instruction 4000.19, and DoD Instruction 5100.73 (References
(g), (h), and (i), respectively).

   c. May designate their subordinate commands to provide or arrange for the administrative
and logistical support of the headquarters of the Combatant Commands, the USELEMNORAD,
and the subordinate unified commands.

    d. Shall resolve disputes concerning the support of these headquarters in coordination with
the Commanders of the Combatant Commands. Unresolved disputes shall be forwarded through
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense for resolution.


2. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. In addition to the organizations listed in
Enclosure 3, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall maintain, in coordination with the
Deputy Chief Management Officer, a listing of all other joint activities established within a
particular Combatant Command. This list will record the DoD Component providing
administrative and logistical support to the headquarters of each Combatant Command,
subordinate unified command, and other joint activities, along with the associated source
documents that authorized the organization and its support relationship.


3. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS AND THE COMMANDER,
USELEMNORAD. The Commanders of the Combatant Commands and the Commander,
USELEMNORAD, shall:

    a. Identify their requirements to the applicable Secretary of the Military Department
designated in Enclosure 3 or the Secretary’s designated subordinate command and coordinate for
the required administrative and logistical support.

    b. Resolve disputes concerning the support of their headquarters in coordination with the
applicable Secretary of the Military Department. Unresolved disputes shall be forwarded
through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense for resolution.



Change 1, 09/07/2017                             5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                           DoDD 5100.03, February 9, 2011




4. COMMANDER, U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND (USSOCOM). In addition to
the responsibilities in section 3 of this enclosure, the Commander, USSOCOM, in accordance
with section 167 of Reference (b) and Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference
(j)), shall program and budget for the special operations-peculiar support of the USSOCOM
headquarters, TSOC headquarters, and other joint special operations commands established
within the Combatant Commands for which funds have been transferred from the Military
Departments to Major Force Program 11.




Change 1, 09/07/2017                         6                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                      DoDD 5100.03, February 9, 2011


                                    ENCLOSURE 3

                                     CCSA LIST

                                   Table. CCSA List


                         COMMAND                                     CCSA
 HQ U.S. Africa Command                                    Secretary of the Army
 HQ U.S. Central Command                                   Secretary of the Air Force
 HQ U.S. Cyber Command                                     Secretary of the Air Force
 HQ U.S. Element, North American Aerospace Defense         Secretary of the Air Force
 Command
 HQ U.S. European Command                                  Secretary of the Army
 HQ U.S. Northern Command                                  Secretary of the Air Force
 HQ U.S. Pacific Command                                   Secretary of the Navy
       HQ U.S. Forces Korea                                Secretary of the Army
       HQ U.S. Forces Japan                                Secretary of the Navy
       HQ Alaskan Command                                  Secretary of the Navy
 HQ U.S. Southern Command                                  Secretary of the Army
 HQ U.S. Special Operations Command                        Secretary of the Air Force
       HQ Special Operations Command Africa                Secretary of the Army
       HQ Special Operations Command Central               Secretary of the Air Force
       HQ Special Operations Command Europe                Secretary of the Army
       HQ Special Operations Command Korea                 Secretary of the Army
       HQ Special Operations Command Pacific               Secretary of the Navy
       HQ Special Operations Command South                 Secretary of the Army
       Joint Special Operations Command                    Secretary of the Army
 HQ U.S. Strategic Command                                 Secretary of the Air Force
 HQ U.S. Transportation Command                            Secretary of the Air Force




Change 1, 09/07/2017                                                      GLOSSARY
                                          7
                                                                 DoDD 5100.03, February 9, 2011


                                           GLOSSARY

                                          DEFINITIONS


administrative and logistical support. For the purposes of this Directive, professional, technical,
administrative, logistical, and/or base operating support (to include necessary infrastructure) that
is performed in, or provided directly to, the headquarters of a Combatant Command,
USELEMNORAD, or subordinate unified command to perform the headquarters assigned
mission effectively, and as otherwise directed.

Combatant Command Support Agent. The Secretary of a Military Department to whom the
Secretary of Defense or the Deputy Secretary of Defense has assigned administrative and
logistical support of the headquarters of a Combatant Command, USELEMNORAD, or
subordinate unified command. The nature and scope of the CCSA responsibilities, functions,
and authorities shall be prescribed at the time of assignment or in keeping with existing
agreements and practices, and they shall remain in effect until the Secretary of Defense or the
Deputy Secretary of Defense revokes, supersedes, or modifies them. (Approved for inclusion in
the next edition of the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference (k)).)

Service-common. Equipment, material, supplies, and services adopted by a Military Service for
use by its own forces and activities. These include standard military items, base operating
support, and the supplies and services provided by a Military Service to support and sustain its
own forces, including those assigned to the Combatant Commands. Items and services defined
as Service-common by one Military Service are not necessarily Service-common for all other
Military Services. See also special operations-peculiar.

special operations-peculiar. Equipment, material, supplies, and services required for special
operations missions for which there is no Service-common requirement. These are limited to
items and services initially designed for, or used by, special operations forces until adopted for
Service-common use by one or more Military Service; modifications approved by the
Commander, USSOCOM, for application to standard items and services used by the Military
Services; and items and services approved by the Commander, USSOCOM, as critically urgent
for the immediate accomplishment of a special operations mission. See also Service-common.

subordinate unified command. Defined in Reference (k).

theater special operations command. The subordinate unified command established by a
Combatant Commander to plan, coordinate, conduct, and support joint special operations.
(Approved for modification in the next edition of Reference (k).)




Change 1, 09/07/2017                                                                   GLOSSARY
                                                 8
