                           Department of Defense
                               DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 7045.14
                                                                                January 25, 2013
                                                         Incorporating Change 1, August 29, 2017

                                                                                           USD(C)

SUBJECT:      The Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE) Process

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 7045.14 (Reference (a)) to update established policy and
assigned responsibilities for the PPBE process.

   b. Provides PPBE process descriptions and data release restrictions.

   c. Incorporates and cancels Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (b)).

    d. Supersedes and cancels DoD Instruction 7045.7 and DoD 7045.7-H (References (c) and
(d)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff (CJCS), the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. The PPBE shall serve as the annual resource allocation process for DoD within a
quadrennial planning cycle. The Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), force development
guidance, program guidance, and budget guidance are the principal guides used in this process.
Programs and budgets shall be formulated annually. The budget shall cover 1 year, and the
program shall encompass an additional 4 years.
                                                                DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013



   b. The Secretary of Defense:

       (1) Assisted by senior review groups, provides centralized policy throughout the PPBE
process.

       (2) Exercises centralized control of executive policy direction by making major policy
decisions, defining planning goals, issuing programming guidance, and allocating resources.

       (3) Provides the Combatant Commanders, through periodic councils, additional
opportunities for input and comment in all phases of the PPBE process.

    c. The Deputy Secretary of Defense manages the day-to-day management and operation of
the PPBE process. The Deputy Secretary of Defense, supported by his designated management
process, provides overall PPBE leadership and oversight, and assists the Secretary of Defense in
overall PPBE leadership roles.

   d. The PPBE process:

      (1) Supports the objective to provide the DoD with the most effective mix of forces,
equipment, manpower, and support attainable within fiscal constraints.

       (2) Facilitates the alignment of resources to prioritized capabilities based on an
overarching strategy and requires balancing necessary warfighting capabilities with risk,
affordability, and effectiveness.

       (3) Provides mechanisms for making and implementing fiscally sound decisions in
support of the national security strategy and national defense strategy.

        (4) Facilitates execution reviews of past decisions and actions. The reviews shall assess
actual execution performance based on goals and strategic objectives. Recommendations from
these reviews shall be linked to decisions on future resource allocations.

       (5) Accepts, as inputs, products of the acquisition and requirements processes outlined in
DoDD 5000.01 (Reference (e)), DoDD 8000.01 (Reference (f)), and CJCS Instruction 3170.01
(Reference (g)).

    i. Due to the sensitive nature of pre-decisional PPBE information, data release restrictions
shall be applied in accordance with this Directive.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Change 1, 08/29/2017                             2
                                                           DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013




7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective January 25, 2013.




                                                 Ashton B. Carter
                                                 Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Release of PPBE Documents
   4. Additional PPBE Process Descriptions
Glossary




Change 1, 08/29/2017                         3
                                                                 DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


                                          ENCLOSURE 1

                                          REFERENCES


(a)    DoD Directive 7045.14, “The Planning, Programming, and Budgeting System (PPBS),”
       May 22, 1984 (hereby cancelled)
(b)    Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Control of Planning, Programming,
       Budgeting and Execution (PPBE) Documents and Information” March 27, 2004 (hereby
       cancelled)
(c)    DoD Instruction 7045.7, “Implementation of the Planning, Programming, and Budgeting
       System (PPBS),” May 23, 1984 (hereby cancelled)
(d)    DoD 7045.7-H, “Future Years Defense Program (FYDP) Structure,” April 2004 (hereby
       cancelled)
(e)    DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003, as amended
 (f)   DoD Directive 8000.01, “Management of the Department of Defense Information
       Enterprise (DoD IE),” March 17, 2016, as amended
(g)    Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3170.01, “Joint Capabilities Integration
       and Development,” current edition
(h)    DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation” current
       edition




Change 1, 08/29/2017                              4                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). The USD(C)/CFO shall:

   a. Conduct and coordinate the budget review by evaluating the DoD Component budget
submissions for financial appropriateness while maintaining the administration’s fiscal controls.

   b. Conduct program execution and performance reviews.

   c. Prepare and publish budget decision documents in coordination with the Director, Cost
Assessment and Program Evaluation (DCAPE).

   d. Prepare the DoD budget for submission to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).

   e. Present and justify the DoD budget to the Congress.

    f. Advise the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense on all PPBE matters related to
financial management.


2. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall:

   a. Conduct and coordinate the planning phase of the PPBE process.

    b. Prepare, coordinate, and publish planning guidance for the employment and development
of the force.

   c. Lead DoD-wide efforts for the QDR, including development of the defense strategy.

   d. Review defense planning scenarios and national plans to determine the demands that
might be placed on the DoD, identify shortfalls, and guide resource allocations based on strategic
analysis when appropriate.

    e. Advise the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense concerning plans, programs,
capabilities, and budgets to meet U.S. objectives and counter projected threats and on the degree
to which the DoD program supports the defense strategy.

    f. Provide recommendations to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, in
coordination with the CJCS as appropriate, regarding DoD equities in the processes of other
Federal agencies prior to the submittal of agency budgets to OMB to maximize program cost-
sharing opportunities. Coordinate communications with the National Security Staff and other
Federal departments and agencies with responsibility for national security policy.



Change 1, 08/29/2017                            5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


3. DCAPE. The DCAPE shall:

   a. Prepare and publish:

       (1) DoD fiscal guidance.

       (2) DoD programming guidance.

       (3) Programmatic decision documents in coordination with the USD(C)/CFO.

       (4) The Future Years Defense Program (FYDP).

   b. Conduct and coordinate the DoD program review.

    c. Provide independent analysis and advice to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of
Defense concerning plans, programs, budgets, and capabilities in relation to U.S. defense
objectives, projected threats, estimated costs, and resource constraints established in the PPBE
process.

     d. Lead analytical efforts in support of the QDR; provide cost estimates for all QDR
initiatives in order to recommend resource allocations to support these initiatives. Coordinate
these analytical efforts with the USD(P).


4. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L) shall:

    a. Advise the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense on all PPBE matters related to
acquisition, technology, logistics, installations, equipment, and environmental functions,
including providing cost and schedule needs for approved programs to execute successfully and
deliver intended performance within the Defense Acquisition System process.

   b. Within the Defense Acquisition System process, ensure approved programs are fiscally
and technically executable within available resources.

    c. Assist in the development of resource planning goals, programming objectives, and
related guidance.


5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall advise the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense on
all PPBE matters related to total force (active and reserve military, civilian, and contract support)
including planning, requirements, readiness, workforce mix and balance, applicable personnel
policies, and healthcare issues.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                              6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


6. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)). The USD(I) shall
advise the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense on all PPBE matters related to
intelligence, counterintelligence, security, sensitive activities, and other intelligence-related
matters.


7. DEPUTY CHIEF MANAGEMENT OFFICER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.
The Deputy Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense shall provide
administrative and managerial support to the Deputy Secretary’s senior governance bodies.


8. DoD CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (DoD CIO). The DoD CIO will participate in the
PPBE process and advise the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, DCAPE,
USD(C)/CFO, USD(P), and the USD(AT&L) on major cyber investments, information
technology (IT) resource allocations, and investment decisions, including recommending
whether to continue, modify, or terminate IT investments. The DoD CIO will also perform these
functions as part of the QDR process and the annual Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
Program Review effort.


9. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall develop
and execute the programs and budgets necessary to achieve national objectives in accordance
with this Directive, and provide the day-to-day management of the resources under their control.


10. CJCS. The CJCS, in addition to the responsibilities in section 9 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Advise the Secretary of Defense on all PPBE matters to include The Chairman’s Program
Recommendation and Assessment of DoD Component programs and budgets as they relate to
the priorities established in strategic plans and the requirements of the Commanders of the
Combatant Commands and Chief, National Guard Bureau.

    b. Function as a joint warfighter advocate in all PPBE phases, ensuring that cost-effective
solutions for joint warfighter requirements are considered for funding by the DoD Components
during the PPBE process.

   c. Prioritize requirements within warfare capability areas to assist the PPBE process in
developing affordable solutions to warfighting problems.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                             7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                             RELEASE OF PPBE DOCUMENTS


1. GENERAL. Documents and associated data sets produced during the PPBE process set the
details of defense strategy and proposed plans, programs, and budgets.

    a. All PPBE documents are, at a minimum, for official use only. Access to materials by
those not directly involved in the PPBE process undermines the confidentiality necessary for the
Secretary of Defense to obtain candid advice on the defense program. In addition, access to
PPBE information by private firms seeking DoD contracts may jeopardize the integrity of the
procurement process. Therefore, to the extent permitted by law, PPBE documents and associated
data shall not be disclosed outside the DoD and other Government agencies directly involved in
the defense planning and resource allocation process.

    b. Contracts that require the contractor to have access to PPBE data in the performance of
the contract will contain a nondisclosure clause, prohibiting the release of PPBE material and
requiring employees to sign a nondisclosure agreement.

    c. When permitted by law, requests for release of PPBE documents may be granted on a
case-by-case basis to meet compelling needs, under the guidelines described in this enclosure.


2. APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Secretaries of the Military Departments, CJCS, the Under
Secretaries and Assistant Secretaries of Defense, DCAPE, and the Director, Operational Test and
Evaluation are designated as the approval authorities for disclosing PPBE documents and data
outside the DoD and to other Government agencies directly involved in the defense planning and
resource allocation process. This disclosure authority is restricted to PPBE documents and data
generated by the offices and organizations they oversee, but excludes the documents and data
listed in Section 3 of this enclosure.


3. DISCLOSURE AUTHORITY. The disclosure authority for the documents and data sources
listed in paragraphs 3.a. through 3.c. of this enclosure is maintained in OSD. Requests for
release of this information must be made in writing to the listed official.

   a. USD(P)

       (1) The national defense strategy.

       (2) Planning guidance for employment of the force.

       (3) Planning guidance for development of the force.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                            8                               ENCLOSURE 4
                                                               DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


   b. DCAPE

       (1) Programming guidance.

       (2) Fiscal guidance.

       (3) Program and budget displays.

       (4) Program objective memorandums (POMs), FYDP documents, and Office of the
DCAPE data systems (i.e., the Data Warehouse and the Select and Native Programming
systems).

        (5) Program review proposals and associated documents, including issue outlines,
papers, briefings, and summaries.

       (6) Proposed Military Department program reductions or program offsets.

       (7) Independent cost estimates.

       (8) Analyses of alternatives.

   c. USD(C)/CFO

       (1) DoD Component budget submissions, to include budget estimates, justification, and
materials submitted in support of budget estimates submissions.

       (2) Budget decision documents.

       (3) Reports on the results of queries from the Comptroller data systems (i.e., Comptroller
Information System or the Program Resources Collection Process system).

       (4) Classified P-1; R-1; Procurement Programs; and Research, Development, Test and
Evaluation Programs documents.

       (5) Classified DD Form 1414, “Base for Reprogramming Action.” Form requirements
are provided at http://comptroller.defense.gov/fmr/03/03_06_appendix_a_1.pdf

        (6) Classified DD Form 1416, “Report of Programs.” Form requirements are provided at
http://comptroller.defense.gov/fmr/03/03_06_appendix_a_4.pdf

       (7) Budget execution reports.


4. COORDINATION. Coordinate with the Office of the General Counsel of the Department of
Defense when there is reason to believe that litigation is pending that may influence the release
of PPBE information, or otherwise, as appropriate.



Change 1, 08/29/2017                            9                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 4

                       ADDITIONAL PPBE PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS


1. PLANNING

    a. In the planning phase, the military role and defense posture of the United States and the
DoD in the world environment shall be examined, considering enduring national security
objectives, and the need for efficient management of defense resources. The focus shall be on:

       (1) Defining the national defense strategy necessary to help maintain national security
and support U.S. foreign policy.

        (2) Planning the integrated and balanced military forces necessary to accomplish that
strategy.

       (3) Defining the policy framework, needed to manage DoD resources, including:

           (a) Priorities

           (b) Affordability

           (c) Balanced risk

           (d) Suitability

           (e) Feasibility

           (f) Effectiveness

        (4) Providing strategic decision options to the Secretary of Defense to help in assessing
the role of national defense in the formulation of national security policy and related decisions.
Those decision options shall be:

           (a) Informed by the relevant approved joint operating concepts.

          (b) Based on systematic analysis of current and programmed forces in relation to the
demands of the primary missions defined by the defense strategy.

    b. The DoD statement of national defense objectives and policies and the priorities on
military missions shall be conveyed in planning guidance.

   c. Conducted under the direction of USD(P), the planning process will evaluate the
operational utility and cost effectiveness of major decision options.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                            10                                 ENCLOSURE 4
                                                               DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


2. RESOURCING

   a. Programming

       (1) The DoD Components shall develop proposed programs consistent with the planning
guidance, programming guidance, and fiscal guidance. These programs shall reflect systematic
analysis of missions and objectives to be achieved, alternative methods of accomplishing them,
and the effective allocation of the resources.

       (2) The CJCS shall analyze the programs and provide a risk assessment based on the
capability of the composite force level and support program for the U.S. Armed Forces to
execute the strategy approved during the planning phase. A program review is conducted; any
changes to Component programs are published in decision documents.

   b. Budgeting

       (1) The DoD Components shall develop and submit detailed budget estimates for their
programs in accordance with fiscal and joint programming guidelines and DoD 7000.14-R
(Reference (h)).

        (2) A budget review shall be conducted in coordination with a program review and with
participation by the OMB. Budgetary determinations shall be issued in decision documents.

   c. Execution Review

       (1) The DoD Components shall conduct annual reviews to determine how well programs
and financing have met joint warfighting needs.

       (2) The DoD Components shall assess:

           (a) Compliance with priorities expressed in the planning and programming guidance.

           (b) Compliance with Secretary of Defense decisions and guidance.

            (c) Program results, as measured by established performance metrics. Components
shall incorporate these performance metrics in their program and budget submissions.

           (d) Other results critical to successful program execution.

       (3) OSD staff offices shall assess the findings of the DoD Components and recommend
program and budget adjustments where applicable, in coordination with the CJCS.

    d. FYDP. The decisions associated with all phases of the PPBE process shall be reflected in
the FYDP.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                           11                              ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


CJCS           Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DCAPE          Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
DoD CIO        DoD Chief Information Officer
DoDD           DoD Directive

FYDP           Future Years Defense Program

IT             information technology

OMB            Office of Management and Budget

POM            program objectives memorandum
PPBE           planning, programming, budgeting, and execution

QDR            Quadrennial Defense Review

USD(AT&L) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(C)/CFO Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
           Department of Defense
USD(I)     Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)     Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R) Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

FYDP. Program and financial plan for the DoD as approved by the Secretary of Defense. The
FYDP arrays cost data, manpower, and force structure over a 5-year period (force structure for
an additional 3 years), portraying this data by major force program for DoD internal review for
the program and budget review submission. It is also provided to the Congress annually in
conjunction with the President’s budget.

POM. The final product of the programming process within the DoD, the DoD Component’s
POM displays the resource allocation decisions of the Military Departments in response to and in
accordance with planning and programming guidance.

QDR. A legislatively-mandated review of DoD strategy and priorities. The QDR sets the long-
term course for DoD as it assesses the threats and challenges that the Nation faces and re-


Change 1, 08/29/2017                            12                                  GLOSSARY
                                                               DoDD 7045.14, January 25, 2013


balances DoD’s strategies, capabilities, and forces to address today’s conflicts and tomorrow’s
threats.

senior review groups. Groups designated by the Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Defense.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                           13                                   GLOSSARY
