                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 1310.01
                                                                                 August 23, 2013
                                                 Incorporating Change 1, Effective April 29, 2020

                                                                                        USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Rank and Seniority of Commissioned Officers

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5124.02 (Reference (a)), this
instruction reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 1310.01 (Reference (b)) to update policy,
responsibilities, and procedures to determine the dates of rank and precedence of commissioned
officers on the active-duty list and on the reserve active-status list.


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that the relative seniority of commissioned officers who are
placed on the active-duty list or reserve active-status list is determined uniformly and equitably
among the Military Services.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. Enclosure 3 provides procedures to determine the dates of rank of
commissioned officers and the seniority among commissioned officers.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.
                                                              DoDI 1310.01, August 23, 2013


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance updates references and removes
expiration language in accordance with current Chief Management Officer of the Department of
Defense direction.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective August 23, 2013.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




                                             2
Change 1, 04/29/2020
                                                            DoDI 1310.01, August 23, 2013


                                     ENCLOSURE 1

                                     REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b) DoD Instruction 1310.01, “Rank and Seniority of Commissioned Officers,” May 3, 2006,
    as amended (hereby cancelled)
(c) DoD Instruction 1310.02, “Original Appointment of Officers,” March 26, 2015
(d) DoD Instruction 1312.03, “Entry Grade Credit for Commissioned Officers and Warrant
    Officers,” December 28, 2018
(e) Title 10, United States Code




Change 1, 04/29/2020                        3                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 1310.01, August 23, 2013


                                      ENCLOSURE 2

                                    RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) establishes policies governing the rank and seniority of
commissioned officers.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR READINESS AND FORCE
MANAGEMENT (ASD(R&FM)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), the ASD(R&FM) develops and oversees the policies governing the rank and
seniority of commissioned officers.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

   a. Implement this instruction.

   b. Provide for the appointment of officers in accordance with DoDI 1310.02 (Reference (c)).

   c. Recommend changes, as necessary, to this instruction to the USD(P&R).




Change 1, 04/29/2020                          4                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 1310.01, August 23, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. COMMISSIONED OFFICER GRADES. Among the grades listed in the Figure, the grades
of general and admiral are equivalent and are senior to the other grades of second lieutenant or
ensign through lieutenant general or vice admiral; the grades of second lieutenant and ensign are
equivalent and are junior to the other grades of first lieutenant or lieutenant (junior grade)
through general or admiral.

                              Figure. Commissioned Officer Grades

                  Army, Air Force, and Marine Corps               Navy
                  General                                         Admiral
                  Lieutenant General                              Vice Admiral
                  Major General                                   Rear Admiral
                  Brigadier General                               Rear Admiral (lower half)
                  Colonel                                         Captain
                  Lieutenant Colonel                              Commander
                  Major                                           Lieutenant Commander
                  Captain                                         Lieutenant
                  First Lieutenant                                Lieutenant (junior grade)
                  Second Lieutenant                               Ensign


2. EQUIVALENT GRADE RANKING. Rank among commissioned officers of the same grade
or of equivalent grades is determined by comparing dates of rank.

    a. An officer whose date of rank is earlier than the date of rank of another officer of the same
or equivalent grade is senior to that officer.

    b. The Chief of Staff of the Army, the Chief of Naval Operations, the Chief of Staff of the
Air Force, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps rank among themselves according to dates
of appointment to those offices, and rank above all other officers on the active-duty list of the
Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps, except for the Chairman and the Vice
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who respectively outrank all other officers of the Military
Services.


3. DATE OF RANK OF REGULAR OFFICERS OTHER THAN ACADEMY GRADUATES.
Except as provided in section 5 of this enclosure, the date of rank of a person originally
appointed as a Regular commissioned officer in the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, or the
Marine Corps who is not a Service Academy graduate is the date of that appointment unless:




Change 1. 04/29/2020                             5                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1310.01, August 23, 2013


    a. The appointee was, at the time of appointment, a Reserve officer on the active-duty list, in
which case the date of rank is the same as that which the officer held immediately before his or
her appointment as a Regular officer;

     b. The appointee was, at the time of appointment, a Reserve officer not on the active-duty
list, in which case the date of rank is the same as that which the officer would have held
immediately before appointment as a Regular officer (providing that the officer had been serving
on the active-duty list as a Reserve officer on the date of appointment as a Regular officer), or;

    c. The appointee is credited with service credit. In this case, the date of rank will be adjusted
to an earlier date. That date will be earlier to the extent that the service credit awarded is in
excess of that required for the officer’s appointment grade under DoDI 1312.03 (Reference (d)).


4. DATE OF RANK FOR OFFICERS IN TRANSITION TO AND FROM THE RESERVE
ACTIVE-STATUS LIST AND ACTIVE-DUTY LIST

    a. The Secretary of the Military Department concerned may change an officer’s date of rank
to a later date to reflect such officer’s qualifications and experience. This applies in the case of a
Reserve officer ordered to active duty who:

        (1) Is placed on the active-duty list and who has not been on continuous active duty since
his or her original appointment as a Reserve commissioned officer; or

         (2) Is transferred from an inactive status to an active status and placed on the active-duty
list or reserve active-status list, effective on the date on which he or she is placed on the active-
duty list or reserve active-status list.

   b. The authority to change the date of rank of a Reserve officer who is placed on the active-
duty list to a later date does not apply in the case of an officer who:

        (1) Has served continuously in the Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve since the
officer’s last promotion or;

       (2) Is placed on the active-duty list while on a promotion list as described in section
14317 of Title 10, United States Code (Reference (e)).

    c. An officer on the reserve active-status list who is on a promotion list and is placed on the
active-duty list will be placed on an appropriate promotion list for officers on the active-duty list
under section 14317(b) of Reference (e) provided:

      (1) The officer is on a promotion list as a result of selection for promotion by a
mandatory promotion board or a special selection board.

       (2) Before being promoted, the officer is placed on the active-duty list of the same
Military Service and placed in the same competitive category.



Change 1. 04/29/2020                              6                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1310.01, August 23, 2013



       (3) The effective date of promotion and date of rank will be the same as if the officer had
been selected to the grade concerned by the promotion board for active-duty list officers.

    d. An officer on the active-duty list and on a promotion list who is removed from the active-
duty list and placed on the reserve active-status list of the same Military Service and in the same
competitive category (including a Regular officer who on removal from the active-duty list is
appointed as a Reserve Officer and placed on the reserve active-status list) will be placed on an
appropriate promotion list in accordance with section 14317(c) of Reference (e). The effective
date of promotion and date of rank will be the same as if the officer had been selected to the
grade concerned by the promotion board for reserve active-status list officers. If the Secretary of
the Military Department concerned determines circumstances exist such that an inequity would
result in following the foregoing method in determining date of rank, he or she may set the date
of rank.


5. DATE OF RANK OF SECOND LIEUTENANTS OR ENSIGNS APPOINTED IN MAY OR
JUNE NOT THROUGH THE SERVICE ACADEMIES. The date of rank of second lieutenants
or ensigns appointed in accordance with section 2106 or 2107 of Reference (e) in May or June of
any year who enter active duty during either of those months is the date that the class of cadets or
midshipmen graduated from one of the Service Academies. Such appointees who enter active
duty before the graduation date of the appropriate Service Academy may take precedence over
academy graduates. Within such groups of section 2106 and 2107 of Reference (e) appointees,
distinguished military graduates may take precedence.


6. RANKING OFFICERS WITH THE SAME GRADE AND DATE OF RANK. Graduates of
Service Academies will initially be placed on the active-duty list of their Military Service in
order of their class standing at the Service Academy from which they graduated. As an
exception, academy graduates appointed in another Military Service in accordance with section
541 of Reference (e) will be placed on the active-duty list of the gaining Military Service by
integrating their class standing into the class standings of the graduates of the academy of the
gaining Military Service. All other officers who have the same or equivalent grades and the
same date of rank will rank in order of seniority based on the following criteria:

   a. Previous grade’s date of rank or, if the same, the date of rank in an earlier grade.

   b. Previous active duty grade relative seniority (if applicable).

   c. Total active commissioned service.

   d. Total federal commissioned service or date of appointment as a commissioned officer.

   e. Further differentiation as established by the Secretary of the Military Department
concerned.




Change 1. 04/29/2020                             7                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1310.01, August 23, 2013



7. TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS OR GRADES HELD BY REASON OF ASSIGNMENT.
A commissioned officer whose position on the active-duty list or reserve active-status list results
from service in a temporary appointment or in a grade held by reason of assignment has, when
that appointment or assignment ends, the grade and position on the active-duty list or reserve
active-status list that he or she would have held had he or she not received that appointment or
assignment.


8. ADJUSTING DATE OF RANK OF CERTAIN PROMOTIONS DELAYED BY REASON
OF UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES. The Secretary of the Military Department concerned may
adjust the date of rank of an officer, except a general or flag officer, appointed to a higher grade
under section 624(a) or 14308(a) of Reference (e) if the appointment of that officer to the higher
grade is delayed by unusual circumstances. The Secretary of the Military Department concerned
must determine that the unusual circumstance caused an unintended delay in processing or
approval of the selection board report or promotion list in order for an officer’s date of rank to be
adjusted and will notify the USD(P&R) of adjustments exercised under this authority. The
notification will include the name of the officer(s) and a discussion of the reasons for the
adjustment of the date of rank.

    a. The adjusted date of rank for an officer must be consistent with the officer’s position on
the promotion list for that grade and competitive category when additional officers in that grade
and competitive category were needed. The adjusted date of rank must also be in compliance
with applicable strength limitations for officers in that grade and competitive category and will
be the effective date for pay and allowances for that grade.

    b. When the Secretary of the Military Department concerned adjusts the date of rank of an
officer who received Senate confirmation in that grade, and the adjustment is to a date before the
Senate confirmation date, that Secretary of the Military Department concerned will send a letter
to the Senate Armed Services Committee providing notification of that adjustment. The letter
will include the name of the officer and a discussion of the reasons for the adjustment of the date
of rank. A copy of that letter will be provided to the USD(P&R).




Change 1. 04/29/2020                              8                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1310.01, August 23, 2013


                                           GLOSSARY

                                     PART I. ACRONYMS

ASD(R&FM) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness and Force Management

DoDI            DoD instruction

USD(P&R)        Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS


Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.

active-duty list. Defined in section 101(b)(13) of Reference (e).

commissioned officer. Defined in Reference (c).

reserve active-status list. Defined in section 101(c)(7) of Reference (e).




Change 1, 04/29/2020                             9                             GLOSSARY
