                             Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 3115.11
                                                                              January 22, 2009
                                                    Incorporating Change 3, September 21, 2020

                                                                                      USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:     DoD Intelligence Human Capital Management Operations

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

   a. Establishes policy, prescribes procedures, and assigns responsibilities for the development
and execution of the DoD Intelligence Human Capital Programs under the authority of DoD
Directives (DoDDs) 5143.01 and 5124.02 (References (a) and (b)).

    b. Designates the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) as
the accreditation and certification official for the Defense Intelligence Components Department
Level programs.

    c. Assigns the responsibility of developing human capital policies and guidance for the DoD
intelligence workforce to the Human Capital Management Office (HCMO) within the Office of
the USD(I&S).

   d. Implements DoDD 1400.35 (Reference (c)) regarding the Defense Intelligence Human
Resource Board (DIHRB).

    e. Incorporates and cancels Office of the USD(I&S) Memorandum (Reference (d)) by
authorizing the DoD Intelligence Training and Education Board (DITEB) as the decision-making
body for policy coordination and oversight on Defense Intelligence, workforce development,
training, and education matters in support of the DIHRB to include the President of the National
Defense Intelligence College (DoD Instruction (DoDI) 3305.01 (Reference (e))), the Chairs of
the Training Councils in DoDI 3305.02, DoDI 3305.09, DoDI 3305.10, DoDI 3305.11, DoDI
3305.13, DoDI 3305.14, (References (f) through (k)) and others designated by the DITEB Chair.

   f. Establishes the Defense Intelligence Foreign Language and Area Advisory Group
(DIFLAAG) as the advisory body on behalf of the USD(I&S) for policy coordination and
oversight on DoD intelligence foreign language, cultural, and regional requirements, policy, and
                                                                DoDI 3115.11, January 22, 2009


programs in support to DoD Senior Language Authority (SLA) (DoDD 5160.41E (Reference
(l)).

    g. Formalizes the role of the Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel System (DCIPS)
Working Group for policy coordination and oversight on defense civilian intelligence human
resource matters in support to the DIHRB.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department
of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

    a. accreditation. A status granted to a Defense Intelligence Component educational or
training facility or program that meets or exceeds stated criteria of educational quality.

    b. certification. The awarding of a credential acknowledging that an individual has
demonstrated a specified level of knowledge or competence, frequently as defined by a
professional standards setting organization.

   c. Defense Intelligence Component. Defined in Reference (c).

     d. human capital. The organizational asset made up of the collective sum of the attributes,
life experiences, knowledge, inventiveness, energy, and enthusiasm that people choose to invest
in their work.

    e. human resources. The personnel within the workforce including military officers and
enlisted personnel (including members of the Reserve Components) and civilian employees
working intelligence, counterintelligence, and security issues.

   f. professional development. The acquiring of skills, competencies (e.g., knowledge, skills,
and abilities), and other attributes relevant to one’s profession.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. DoD intelligence human capital programs shall be established and managed at all Defense
Intelligence Components to align to the Department of Defense and, as applicable, to the
Director of National Intelligence (DNI) programs and initiatives.




Change 3, 09/21/2020                            2
                                                              DoDI 3115.11, January 22, 2009


   b. DoD intelligence human capital programs and resource requirements management by the
Defense Intelligence Components shall be developed in consultation with the Office of the DNI
(ODNI) and included in Planning, Programming, and Budgeting (PP&B) actions.

   c. DoD intelligence human capital program implementation shall be effected at the lowest
echelon within the Defense Intelligence Components.

   d. DoD intelligence human capital programs shall support the missions of the Department of
Defense.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. Enclosure 3 provides overarching procedures and requirements for the
establishment and operation of DoD intelligence human capital management forums.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the USD(I&S) in accordance with Public Law 116-92
(Reference (m)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective January 22, 2009.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures




Change 3, 09/21/2020                          3
                                                             DoDI 3115.11, January 22, 2009


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
    (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(b) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c) DoD Directive 1400.35, “Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel System (DCIPS),”
    September 24, 2007, as amended
(d) Director, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, Personnel
    Development, and Readiness Memorandum, “DoD Intelligence Training and Education
    Board (DITEB),” May 6, 2006 (hereby canceled)
(e) DoD Instruction 3305.01, “National Defense Intelligence College,” January 24, 2017, as
    amended
(f) DoD Instruction 3305.02, “DoD General Intelligence Training,” August 12, 2015, as
    amended
(g) DoD Instruction 3305.09, “DoD Cryptologic Training,” June 13, 2013, as amended
(h) DoD Instruction 3305.10, “DoD Geospatial Intelligence (GEOINT) Training,”
    July 3, 2013, as amended
(i) DoD Instruction 3305.11, “DoD Counterintelligence Training,” August 13, 2015, as
    amended
(j) DoD Instruction 3305.13, “DoD Security Training,” February 13, 2014, as amended
(k) DoD Instruction 3305.14, “Joint Intelligence Training,” August 18, 2015, as amended
(l) DoD Directive 5160.41E, “Defense Language, Regional Expertise, and Culture (LREC)
    Program,” August 21, 2015, as amended
(m) Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
    December 20, 2019




Change 3, 09/21/2020                          4                         ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDI 3115.11, January 22, 2009


                                       ENCLOSURE 2

                                    RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(I&S). The USD(I&S), under the authority of Reference (a), and consistent with
Reference (b), in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R), shall:

   a. Provide policy direction and oversight for DoD intelligence human capital programs to the
Defense Intelligence Components, and assign DoD intelligence human capital responsibilities.

   b. In coordination with the USD(P&R), establish a DoD-level accreditation program for the
Defense Intelligence Components, fully aligned with DoD programs, and as applicable, DNI
programs.

   c. Establish a DoD-level certification program for the Defense Intelligence Components
workforce, fully aligned with DoD and DNI programs, and consistent with applicable laws.

   d. Conduct continuous evaluation of DoD intelligence human capital programs and provide
guidance to the Defense Intelligence Components to ensure alignment to DoD intelligence
human capital strategy and direction, and as applicable, to ODNI strategy and direction.

   e. Promulgate guidance in accordance with strategic planning guidance, defense intelligence
guidance, and other appropriate OSD policy guidance; identify DoD intelligence human capital
requirements during the program and budget build and during development of supplemental
requests. Review these requirements and provide additional guidance.

    f. Review the Defense Intelligence Components’ human capital programs within the Military
Intelligence Program and provide recommendations to the Defense Intelligence Components.

   g. Develop, in collaboration with the Military Departments, the Military Annex to the
National Intelligence Community Strategic Human Capital Plan in the National Intelligence
Program Military Personnel Resources Program and consistent with Budget Plans and
Procedures.

   h. Evaluate, in the context of the DoD and DNI Human Capital Strategies, recommendations
from the Defense Intelligence Components on policies, standards, responsibilities, or related
matters on human resources.

    i. Designate the Director, HCMO, to serve as the Chief Human Capital Officer for the
Defense Intelligence Components, who shall provide a management staff to support the efforts of
the DIHRB, DITEB, and DIFLAAG.

    j. Designate a Co-Chair to the DIHRB at the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (DUSD)
level or higher.



Change 3, 09/21/2020                          5                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 3115.11, January 22, 2009



   k. Designate the Chair to the DITEB at the senior level who shall also serve as the
Department-level Chief Learning Officer for the Defense Intelligence Components.

   l. Designate the Chair to the DIFLAAG at the senior level.

    m. Monitor and assess the effectiveness of DoD intelligence human capital programs,
including new requirements and major changes, and recommend, in collaboration with the Heads
of the Defense Intelligence Components, adjustments to assignments of DoD intelligence human
capital responsibilities.

  n. Review and provide guidance and oversight to the Defense Intelligence Components for
DNI Human Capital issuances and leverage those appropriate for the Department of Defense.


2. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R) shall designate a Co-Chair to the DIHRB at the DUSD level or
higher.


3. HEADS OF DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE COMPONENTS. The Heads of the Defense
Intelligence Components shall:

    a. Incorporate guidance from the USD(I&S), the USD(P&R), and as appropriate and
directed by the USD(I&S), the ODNI in the development and execution of DoD intelligence
human capital PP&B actions.

    b. Implement policies, procedures, programs, and requirements as specified in this
Instruction.

    c. Support program evaluation requirements of the Department of Defense and, as tasked by
the USD(I&S), ODNI human capital programs.

    d. Leverage DoD and, as applicable, ODNI Human Capital programs to achieve economies
of scale and capitalize on best practices.

   e. Assemble and maintain a current record of all DoD intelligence human capital
requirements and programs under their cognizance.

    f. Designate a representative at the Defense Intelligence Senior Executive Service (DISES)
or equivalent level to serve on the DIHRB.




Change 3, 09/21/2020                           6                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 3115.11, January 22, 2009


                                        ENCLOSURE 3

                                        PROCEDURES

1. DIHRB

   a. The DIHRB shall address Defense Intelligence Components human capital issues and
forward recommendations and issues to the USD(I&S).

   b. The Co-Chairs of the DIHRB:

       (1) Shall facilitate a forum at which DoD intelligence human capital issues and such
matters as legislative proposals, policy changes, establishment of standards, recommendation of
resource allocations and other human capital related topics may be addressed and
recommendations made to the USD(I&S) and USD(P&R).

     (2) Shall call a meeting of the DIHRB at least bi-monthly or as recommended by the
members.

       (3) May extend, as appropriate, DIHRB participation to non-Defense Intelligence
Components as associate members to allow full access to DoD intelligence human capital, as
appropriate (e.g., ODNI, Office of Management and Budget, and the Office of Personnel
Management).

       (4) Shall designate the Executive Secretary

   c. Membership of the DIHRB will comprise a DISES, or equivalent, from each of the
Defense Intelligence Components, Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense,
Office of the Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense, and the Defense Security
Service.

   d. The DIHRB may charter working groups to address specific issues as required. The Co-
Chairs will designate the Chair for any working group established under the auspices of the
DIHRB.

       (1) The DCIPS Working Group shall develop and update personnel policy, review and
comment on the design of tools to support DCIPS, serve as liaison between OUSD(I&S) and the
Defense Intelligence Components, and provide recommendations to the DIHRB, the USD(I&S),
and the USD(P&R) on personnel business practices matters pertaining to DCIPS
implementation.

        (2) Membership on the DCIPS Working Group will comprise one primary and one
alternate from each of the Defense Intelligence Components, Washington Headquarters Services,
Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense, and others as determined by the
Chair, DCIPS Working Group.




Change 3, 09/21/2020                           7                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 3115.11, January 22, 2009



2. DITEB

    a. The DITEB, comprised of the President of the National Defense Intelligence College
(Reference (d)), the Chairs of the Training Councils listed in References (e) through (h) and
others as determined by the Chair, shall address DoD intelligence education and training issues
of the Defense Intelligence Components.

   b. The Chair of the DITEB shall:

        (1) Provide a forum at which DoD intelligence professional development issues and
matters such as policy changes, establishment of standards, allocation of responsibilities, and
other related topics may be addressed and recommendations made to the USD(I&S) via the
DIHRB.

       (2) Call a meeting of the DITEB at least bi-monthly or as determined by the members.

       (3) Extend DITEB participation to non-Defense Intelligence Components as associate
members to allow full access to DoD intelligence education and training, as appropriate (e.g.,
National Intelligence University, American Council on Education, and the Council on
Occupational Education).


3. DIFLAAG

     a. The DIFLAAG, comprised of representatives of the Defense Intelligence Components and
others as determined by the Chair, shall address the Defense Intelligence foreign language,
cultural, and regional issues of the Defense Intelligence Components, consistent with Reference
(k).

   b. The Chair of the DIFLAAG shall:

       (1) Provide a forum at which Defense Intelligence foreign language, cultural, and
regional requirements, policy, and programs and other related topics may be addressed and
recommendations made to the USD(I&S), the DoD SLA, and the Defense Language Steering
Committee.

     (2) Call a meeting of the DIFLAAG at least bi-monthly or as determined by the
members.

       (3) Extend DIFLAAG participation to non-Defense Intelligence Components as
associate members to allow appropriate access to DoD intelligence foreign language, cultural,
and regional requirements, policy, and programs, as appropriate (e.g., Foreign Language
Executive Committee and Defense Language Steering Committee).




Change 3, 09/21/2020                             8                          ENCLOSURE 3
