                             Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 8145.01
                                                                               January 17, 2012
                                                           Incorporating Change 1, July 28, 2017

                                                                                        DoD CIO

SUBJECT:      DoD Information Assurance Scholarship Program

References:    See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Implements the provisions of sections 2200 et seq. and 7045 of title 10, United States
Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (a)) and establishes policy consistent with DoD Directive (DoDD)
8000.01 and DoDD 8500.01E (References (b) and (c)), in accordance with the guidance in DoD
Instruction 5025.01 (Reference (d)) and the authority in the Deputy Secretary of Defense
Memorandum and DoDD 5144.1 (References (e) and (f)).

   b. Assigns responsibilities and prescribes procedures for executing the DoD Information
Assurance Scholarship Program (IASP).

  c. Incorporates and cancels the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control,
Communications, and Intelligence Memorandum (Reference (g)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

    a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the DoD,
the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the
DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”). The term “Military
Services,” as used herein, refers to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.

   b. The United States Coast Guard. The U.S. Coast Guard will adhere to DoD cybersecurity
requirements, standards, and policies in this instruction in accordance with the direction in
Paragraph 4a of the Memorandum of Agreement Between the Department of Defense and the
Department of Homeland Security (Reference (p)).
                                                                 DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The DoD shall recruit, develop, and retain a highly skilled cadre of professionals to
support the critical information assurance (IA) and information technology (IT) management,
technical, digital and multimedia forensics, cyber, and infrastructure protection functions
required for a secure network-centric environment.

    b. The DoD IASP shall be used to attract new entrants to the DoD IA and IT workforce and
to retain current IA and IT personnel necessary to support the DoD’s diverse warfighting,
business, intelligence, and enterprise information infrastructure requirements.

    c. The academic disciplines with concentrations in IA eligible for IASP support include but
are not limited to: biometrics, business management or administration, computer crime
investigations, computer engineering, computer programming, computer science, computer
systems analysis, cyber operations, cybersecurity, database administration, data management,
digital and multimedia forensics, electrical engineering, electronics engineering, information
security (assurance), information systems, mathematics, network management/operations,
software engineering, and similar disciplines as approved by the DoD Chief Information Officer
(DoD CIO).

   d. Subject to availability of funds, the DoD may provide grants to institutions of higher
education for faculty, curriculum, and infrastructure development and academic research to
support the DoD IA/IT critical areas of interest.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The reporting requirements in this Instruction for the
retention program have been assigned Report Control Symbol (RCS) DD-NII(A)2444 in
accordance with DoD Manual 8910.01 (Reference (h)).


8. RELEASABILITY. This instruction is available on the Directives Division Website at
http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                            2
                                                           DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


9. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


10. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective January 17, 2012.




                                            Teresa M. Takai
                                            DoD Chief Information Officer


Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 1, 07/28/2017                        3
                                                                                                DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................5

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................6

     DoD CIO ....................................................................................................................................6
     DIRNSA ....................................................................................................................................6
     CHANCELLOR, INFORMATION RESOURCES MANAGEMENT COLLEGE (IRMC)....7
     HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS .................................................................................8

ENCLOSURE 3: PROCEDURES ..................................................................................................9

     RETENTION PROGRAM ........................................................................................................9
     RECRUITMENT PROGRAM ...............................................................................................10

     APPENDIXES:
       1. DoD IASP ACADEMIC PROGRAMS FOR RETENTION STUDENTS ..................12
       2. DoD IASP NOMINATION PROCESS FOR RETENTION STUDENTS ..................15
       3. DoD IASP SELECTION PROCESS FOR RECRUITMENT STUDENTS ................17

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................20

     PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................20
     PART II. DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................20




Change 1, 07/28/2017                                                   4                                                      CONTENTS
                                                                       DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


                                            ENCLOSURE 1

                                             REFERENCES


(a) Sections 2200 et seq. and 7045 of title 10, United States Code
(b) DoD Directive 8000.01, “Management of the Department of Defense Information
    Enterprise (DoD IE),” March 17, 2016
(c) DoD Instruction 8500.01, “Cybersecurity,” March 14, 2014
(d) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended
(e) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegation of Authority and Assignment of
    Responsibility under Section 922 of the Floyd D. Spence National Defense Authorization
    Act for Fiscal Year 2001,” June 26, 2001
(f) DoD Directive 5144.02, “DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO),” November 21, 2014
(g) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence
    Memorandum, “Information Assurance Scholarship Program,” July 2, 2001 (hereby
    cancelled)
(h) DoD Manual 8910.01, “DoD Information Collections Manual,” Date varies by volume
(i) DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
    Management Program,” July 10, 2009, as amended
(j) DoD 7000.14-R, Volume 5, Chapter 28, “Department of Defense Financial
    Management Regulation (FMR),” current edition
(k) Section 303a(e) of title 37, United States Code
(l) Section 213.3102(r) of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations
(m) Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Memorandum, “Implementation
    Authority to Employ Individuals Completing Department of Defense Scholarship or
    Fellow Programs,” April 5, 2010
(n) Section 1001 of title 20, United States Code
(o) Section 11101 of title 40, United States Code
(p) Memorandum of Agreement between the Department of Defense and The Department of
    Homeland Security Regarding Department of Defense and U.S. Coast Guard Cooperation
    on Cybersecurity and Cyberspace Operations, January 19, 20171




1
 Available on https://dcms.uscg.afpims.mil/Our-Organization/Assistant-Commandant-for-C4IT-CG-6-/The-Office-
of-Information-Management-CG-61/Interagency-Agreements/


Change 1, 07/28/2017                                 5                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


                                           ENCLOSURE 2

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. DOD CIO. The DoD CIO shall:

    a. Establish overall policy and guidance to conduct and administer the DoD IASP pursuant
to Reference (e).

   b. Develop an annual budget recommendation to administer the DoD IASP and provide
academic scholarships and grants in accordance with Reference (a).

   c. Oversee program administration and execution by the Director, National Security Agency
(DIRNSA).

   d. Chair the DoD IASP Steering Committee, established pursuant to DoD Instruction
5105.18 (Reference (i)) to oversee and provide program direction over:

       (1) Student eligibility criteria.

       (2) Grant and capacity-building selection criteria for awards to National Centers of
Academic Excellence in IA Education (CAE/IAE) and National Centers of Academic Excellence
- Research (CAE-R) (collectively referred to as the CAEs).

       (3) Final approval for the allocation of individual DoD IASP scholarships and grants.

       (4) Communications and marketing plans.

       (5) DoD IASP metrics and analysis of performance results, including student, CAE, and
sponsoring DoD Component feedback.


2. DIRNSA. The DIRNSA, under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence, shall:

   a. Serve as the DoD IASP Executive Administrator to:

       (1) Implement the DoD IASP and publish in writing all of the criteria, procedures, and
standards required for program implementation. Responsibilities are to:

            (a) Implement the scholarship application and selection procedures for recruitment
and retention students.

         (b) Establish procedures for recruiting students to meet service obligations through
employment with a DoD Component upon graduation from their academic program.



Change 1, 07/28/2017                            6                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


          (c) Ensure that all students’ academic eligibility is maintained, service obligations
are completed, and that reimbursement obligations for program disenrollment are fulfilled.

           (d) Establish procedures for CAEs and employing DoD Components to report on
students’ progress.

           (e) Maintain appropriate accounting for all funding disbursements.

             (f) Execute the debt collection process on the behalf of the DoD and in accordance
with Volume 5 of DoD 7000.14-R (Reference (j)) for scholarship recipients who fail to complete
a period of obligated service resulting from their participation in the DoD IASP. This includes,
but is not limited to, exercising the authority under section 2200a(e) of Reference (a), consistent
with the relevant provisions of section 303a(e) of title 37, U.S.C. (Reference (k)), to determine
an amount owed and to take necessary actions to collect the amount owed, and to act upon
requests for waivers, in whole or in part, when determined to be appropriate.

       (2) Subject to availability of funds, make grants on behalf of the DoD CIO to institutions
of higher education to support the establishment, improvement, and administration of IA
education programs pursuant to Reference (a).

           (a) Develop and implement the annual solicitation for proposals for grants.

           (b) Coordinate the review process for grant proposals.

           (c) Distribute grant funding and maintain appropriate accounting.

            (d) Establish annual reporting procedures for grant recipients (CAEs) to detail the
resulting accomplishments of their grant implementations.

           (e) Obtain written documentation from grant recipients (CAEs) on how grant funding
was utilized and the resulting accomplishments.

   b. Provide representation to the DoD IASP Steering Committee and provide briefings and
reports, as required, to effect proper oversight by the DoD CIO and the DoD IASP Steering
Committee.

   c. Maintain databases to support the analysis of performance results.


3. CHANCELLOR, INFORMATION RESOURCES MANAGEMENT COLLEGE (IRMC).
The Chancellor of IRMC of the National Defense University, under the authority, direction, and
control of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:

   a. Establish partner university agreements with CAEs to provide master’s and doctoral
degree opportunities to current, former, and future IRMC students who are awarded retention
scholarships.



Change 1, 07/28/2017                             7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012



  b. Maintain records of DoD IASP student enrollments and graduates and provide data to the
DoD IASP Executive Administrator and the DoD CIO as required.

   c. Serve as the liaison between IRMC retention students, their follow-on partner university,
and the DoD IASP Executive Administrator.

    d. Provide academic representation to the DoD IASP Steering Committee and provide
briefings and reports, as required, on the IRMC portion of the DoD IASP retention program.


4. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

   a. Determine the requirement for DoD IASP usage as a primary vehicle to recruit and retain
IA and IT personnel.

  b. Identify the office of primary responsibility for administering the DoD IASP within their
DoD Component.

    c. Establish DoD Component-specific nomination, selection, and post-academic assignment
criteria for DoD IASP retention students in accordance with the procedures in Enclosure 3.

    d. Determine annual billet requirements for recruitment students (the number of DoD IASP
recruitment scholars who will be placed in full-time employment positions with the Component
upon graduation). This is required to ensure that IASP recruitment graduates have placement
upon graduation.

  e. Participate in the evaluation processes to assess and recommend improvements to the
DoD IASP.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                           8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. RETENTION PROGRAM. The DoD IASP retention program is open to qualified DoD
civilian employees and Service members. Active duty military officers and permanent DoD
civilian employees may apply for a master’s or doctoral degree program; enlisted personnel may
apply for a master’s program. DoD Components may further restrict the eligibility of applicants
based on Component requirements.

    a. There are three DoD academic institutions participating in the DoD IASP: the Air Force
Institute of Technology (AFIT) at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio; the IRMC
of the National Defense University (NDU) at Fort McNair in Washington, DC; and the Naval
Postgraduate School (NPS) in Monterey, California. Students at AFIT and NPS attend full-time
programs. Participants may attend the IRMC either full or part-time to complete the first part of
their required courses and then select a follow-on partner university to complete their remaining
degree requirements either full or part-time. There are no part-time doctoral programs. All
candidates must meet the eligibility requirements for their selected program, which are outlined
in Appendix 1 of this enclosure.

       (1) Military officers and DoD civilian employees may apply to attend any one of the
three DoD academic institutions.

        (2) Enlisted personnel may attend AFIT or the NPS, which is authorized to enroll
enlisted DoD IASP participants pursuant to Reference (a).

    b. Students must select a degree program in one of the academic disciplines listed in
paragraph 4.c. above the signature of this Instruction and in accordance with DoD Component
requirements.

     c. Scholarship funding for AFIT, IRMC, the partner universities, and NPS includes full
tuition costs and required fees and books. All travel costs and necessary position back-fill for
individuals selected for the program must be paid by the nominating DoD Component.
Retention students shall continue to receive their military pay or civilian salary from their DoD
Component throughout their course of study.

   d. DoD Component nominations are due by January 31st each year. The student nomination
process is outlined in Appendix 2 of this enclosure.

        (1) Nominated personnel shall be high-performing employees who are rated at the higher
levels of the applicable performance appraisal system and demonstrate sustained quality
performance with the potential for increased responsibilities. All individuals must be U.S.
citizens and be able to obtain a security clearance.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                             9                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


       (2) Nominations must fulfill specific personnel development requirements for both the
individual nominee and the nominating organization.

         (3) Payback assignments of graduated students shall provide relevant, follow-on
utilization of academic credentials in accordance with DoD Component mission requirements.

        (4) Retention students shall fulfill post-academic service obligations pursuant to sections
2200a and 7045 of Reference (a). Service members shall serve on active duty while fulfilling
designated DoD Component service obligations. DoD civilian employees shall sign a continued
service agreement that complies with section 2200a of Reference (a), prior to commencement of
their education, to continue service within the DoD upon conclusion of their education, for a
period equal to three times the length of the education period. The period of obligated service is
in addition to any other period for which the recipient is obligated to serve on active duty or in
the civil service, as the case may be. Individuals who fail to complete the degree program
satisfactorily or to fulfill the service commitment shall be required to reimburse the United States
pursuant to section 2200a(e) of Reference (a) for payments made to them through the DoD IASP
unless a waiver, in whole or in part, is granted by the DoD IASP Executive Administrator.

    e. DoD IASP retention participants are obligated to remain in good standing in their degree
programs, to continue in service as members of the Military Services or civilian employees and,
where applicable, to repay program costs for failure to complete the degree program
satisfactorily or to fulfill the service commitment pursuant to Reference (a), DoD policy, and the
policies of the respective DoD Component.


2. RECRUITMENT PROGRAM. Annually, in November, the DoD IASP Executive
Administrator announces a solicitation for proposal from CAEs interested in participating in the
DoD IASP. Graduate students and rising junior or senior undergraduates accepted at or enrolled
in one of these institutions may apply for full scholarships to complete a bachelor’s, master’s, or
a doctoral degree, or graduate (post-baccalaureate) certificate program in one of the disciplines
defined in paragraph 4.c. above the signature of this Instruction. Student application
requirements are included in the solicitation proposal released by NSA.

  a. DoD Component recruitment student requirements are due to the DoD IASP Executive
Administrator each year by January 31st.

    b. The student selection process occurs annually in April. The selection process is outlined
in Appendix 3 of this enclosure.

    c. Recruitment students are provided scholarships, covering the full cost of tuition and
selected books and fees. Students are also provided a stipend to cover room and board expenses.

    d. Recruitment students may be required to complete a student internship, depending on the
length of their individual scholarship. For example, if a scholar receives a scholarship their
junior year, an internship is required. If they receive the scholarship their senior year, an




Change 1, 07/28/2017                            10                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


internship is not required. DoD Components typically use the authority granted in section
213.3102(r) of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (l)) to arrange the internship.

    e. Pursuant to section 2200a of Reference (a), all recruitment students shall sign a service
agreement prior to commencement of their education and incur a service commitment, which
commences after the award of the DoD IASP authorized degree on a date to be determined by
the relevant DoD Component. The obligated service in the DoD shall be as a civilian DoD
employee or as an active duty enlisted member or officer in one of the Military Services.

        (1) Individuals selecting employment in the civil service shall incur a service obligation
of 1 year of service to the DoD upon graduation for each year or partial year of scholarship they
receive, in addition to an internship, if applicable. Pursuant to the authority granted in section
2200a(g) of Reference (a) and the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
Memorandum (Reference (m)), DoD Components may appoint DoD IASP graduates to IT
positions as members of the excepted service. Upon satisfactory completion of 2 years of
substantially continuous service, DoD Components may then convert these individuals to career
or career-conditional appointments without competition.

        (2) Individuals enlisting or accepting a commission to serve on active duty in one of the
Military Services shall incur a service obligation of a minimum of 4 years on active duty in that
Service upon graduation. The Military Services may establish a service obligation longer than 4
years, depending on the occupational specialty and type of enlistment or commissioning program
selected.

        (3) Individuals in the recruitment program who fail to complete the degree program
satisfactorily or to fulfill the service commitment upon graduation shall be required to reimburse
the United States pursuant to section 2200a(e) of Reference (a) for payments made to them
through the DoD IASP unless a waiver, in whole or in part, is granted by the DoD IASP
Executive Administrator.

Appendixes
   1. DoD IASP Academic Programs for Retention Students
   2. DoD IASP Nomination Process for Retention Students
   3. DoD IASP Selection Process for Recruitment Students




Change 1, 07/28/2017                            11                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


                               APPENDIX 1 TO ENCLOSURE 3

            DOD IASP ACADEMIC PROGRAMS FOR RETENTION STUDENTS


1. AFIT

    a. AFIT offers master’s degrees and Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) programs in several fields
of study. All AFIT master’s degree students are required to complete a thesis, and all Ph.D.
students must complete a doctoral dissertation. Estimated completion times are 18 months for a
master’s degree and 3 years for the Ph.D. program. A program’s length may be extended if
prerequisite courses are required. Students are nominated to enter the program beginning in
January or August.

   b. Civilian and military applicants may be of any pay grade.

   c. Applicants pursuing a master’s degree must have an appropriate bachelor’s degree with a
minimum grade point average (GPA) of 3.0 out of 4.0. Applicants pursuing a Ph.D. program
must have the appropriate master’s degree and a GPA of 3.5.

   d. Required Graduate Record Examination (GRE) scores for master’s degree applicants are
500 verbal/600 quantitative; for Ph.D. applicants, 550 verbal/650 quantitative. Waivers to the
minimum GRE score requirements may be granted on a case-by-case basis. Waiver requests
should be addressed at the time of application; such requests shall be considered by the AFIT
Admissions Office and the appropriate academic department.

   e. All applicants must possess or be eligible to apply for and maintain a Secret clearance
upon acceptance to AFIT.


2. IRMC

    a. The DoD IASP, as conducted by the IRMC, focuses on DoD civilian employees and
military officers who wish to pursue a full-time or part-time master’s degree or a full-time
doctorate program in an IA discipline. Students are nominated for the program to begin in
January or September. Retention students complete the first part of their degree through IRMC
and then enter a pre-selected partner university to complete their remaining degree requirements.

    b. Retention students at the IRMC must complete designated certificate programs. These
programs may be completed full or part-time (in residence, through distributed learning courses,
or a combination of the two methods). Part-time students will only be accepted into the
scholarship program after completing seven or more courses required for completion of the
designated IRMC certificate.

    c. Retention students who are accepted into the DoD IASP administered through the IRMC
are required to sign a student agreement before starting the program. Graduating IRMC students



Change 1, 07/28/2017                           12           APPENDIX 1 TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


will be required to attend a student development session before transitioning to their selected
partner university.

    d. Upon successful completion of the IRMC requirements, participants continue their studies
at a partner university to complete their master’s degree or doctorate. Full-time doctoral students
complete most requirements in residence; full-time or part-time master’s degree students may
complete their degrees in residence or through distributed learning. Availability of distributed
learning courses and part-time programs vary by the partner university.

    e. Students entering partner universities will receive between 9 and 15 transfer credits
toward completion of their advanced degrees, dependent on the selected university. The degree
the participant earns varies by institution, but each degree includes an IA focus.

    f. Civilian applicants must be a General Schedule (GS)-12 or above (or equivalent) and
military applicants must be an O-4 or above.

    g. Master’s degree applicants must have a bachelor’s degree with a minimum GPA of 3.0
out of 4.0 or equivalent. Ph.D. applicants must have a master’s degree with a GPA of 3.2 out of
4.0 or equivalent. All degrees must be from regionally accredited colleges or universities.
Additionally, DoD IASP partnering universities may require a higher grade point average and/or
prerequisite courses.

   h. Applicants must provide a copy of GRE or Graduate Management Admissions Test
(GMAT) scores.

   i. All applicants must possess at least a Secret clearance.


3. NPS

    a. Civilian employees and military officers may apply for either a Master of Science (MS) or
a Ph.D. in a variety of disciplines through the DoD IASP. Enlisted Service members may apply
for the MS program. Students are nominated to begin the NPS in either January or July.

    b. Both the MS and Ph.D. programs are completed in residence at the NPS. The MS
program takes 7 to 8 academic quarters to complete, which corresponds to a 2-year program. All
MS degree candidates at NPS must complete research and write a thesis. The Ph.D. program
usually takes 3 years to complete. Ph.D. candidates must complete all requirements as specified
by the particular departmental degree program and the NPS Academic Council. Both MS thesis
and Ph.D. dissertation topics require written approval of the NPS DoD IASP Principal
Investigator.

   c. Applicant packages must include specified documentation, appropriate endorsements, and
conform to the program requirements.

       (1) Eligible pay grades are GS-9 (or equivalent) or higher; E-4 through E-9;



Change 1, 07/28/2017                            13           APPENDIX 1 TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


Warrant Officer (WO)-1 through WO-4; and O-1 or higher.

      (2) Personnel entering MS programs must have a bachelor’s degree with a minimum 3.0
GPA (on a 4.0 scale) or equivalent and must meet NPS admissions requirements.

       (3) Ph.D. program requirements are determined individually based on universities
attended, years since last degree, work-related accomplishments, and other factors. Generally,
the NPS requires Ph.D. candidates to be in the upper half of their MS program peers.

       (4) A copy of GRE or GMAT scores must be provided.

       (5) All applicants must possess or be eligible to apply for and maintain a Secret
clearance upon acceptance to the NPS.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                           14           APPENDIX 1 TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


                               APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 3

            DOD IASP NOMINATION PROCESS FOR RETENTION STUDENTS


1. SCHOLARSHIP APPLICANT DOCUMENTATION. All applicants must forward their
nomination packages through appropriate DoD channels in accordance with DoD Component
guidelines. Each applicant package must include:

   a. Cover sheet, which must provide:

       (1) Applicant contact information with office mailing and e-mail addresses and voice/fax
phone numbers.

      (2) Supervisor contact information with name, e-mail address, and voice/fax phone
numbers.

      (3) DoD Component contact information with name, e-mail address, and voice/fax phone
numbers.

      (4) List of previous colleges/universities attended, with school name, degree awarded,
and GPA for each institution attended.

        (5) Proposed institution (AFIT, IRMC and a partner university, or NPS). Applicants
may provide up to three choices. Each choice must include the proposed degree program and
start date. IRMC applicants must also include selection of student status (full-time or part-time)
and the requested partner university student status (full-time or part-time).

   b. Résumé.

    c. Current Standard Form 50, “Notification of Personnel Action” (civilians only) available at
http://www.opm.gov/forms/pdfimage/sf50.pdf.

   d. Applicant’s personal goals statement (4-6 pages, double spaced).

    e. Recommendation from the individual’s supervisor with the endorsement of the next level
supervisor (recommendations and endorsements should highlight how the student’s IA education
will be used). All nominees must have the potential for further promotion.

   f. A copy of GRE or GMAT scores.

    g. Unopened, sealed, official transcripts for all undergraduate and graduate work along with
a copy of each transcript. Original transcripts should not be opened by the DoD Components.

   h. Documentation of the individual’s security clearance. A Joint Personnel Adjudication
System printout is acceptable.



Change 1, 07/28/2017                            15             APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012



   i. Continued service agreement.


2. DoD COMPONENT NOMINATION PACKAGE. Since retention program scholarship
quotas are not individually allotted by DoD Components, it is important for Components to
prioritize their nominees, with alternates identified, as appropriate. The Components shall
compile a single nomination packet containing all approved applicant packets. Nominee names
should be listed in rank order priority with a cover letter that clearly identifies the following
information for each nominee:

   a. Proposed institution (AFIT, IRMC and a partner university, or NPS).

   b. Proposed start date.

   c. Desired degree.

   d. Intent to attend as a full or part-time student. (Only applicable to IRMC and partner
universities).


3. MAILING ADDRESS. One original of each nomination and applicant packet must be
provided by January 31 to:

NSA
9800 Savage Road
Fort Meade, Maryland 20755-6744

ATTN: IASP/NIETP
Retention Program
I083, FANX III, Room B6A27
Suite # 6744


4. NOTIFICATION OF ACCEPTANCE. Subject to availability of funding, a determination of
the number of scholarships to be awarded will be made by the DoD IASP Steering Committee.
Once this determination is made, the DoD IASP Executive Administrator will coordinate with
the three DoD schools to determine final acceptance of candidates. DoD Components will be
formally notified of nominees’ acceptances by March 31st.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                            16            APPENDIX 2 TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


                               APPENDIX 3 TO ENCLOSURE 3

           DOD IASP SELECTION PROCESS FOR RECRUITMENT STUDENTS


1. DoD COMPONENT PARTICIPATION. DoD Components must forward notification of
their intention to participate in the DoD IASP recruitment program to the DoD IASP Executive
Administrator by January 31st of each year. Notification must include the name, phone number,
e-mail address, and mailing address of the Component office of primary responsibility (i.e.,
designated key point of contact). The notification should also indicate the number of students
and the specific academic disciplines and series/occupational code(s) sought to meet Component
mission requirements. The key point of contact shall:

   a. Assess DoD Component skill requirements and provide the annual recruitment student
requirements (e.g., number of students, specific academic disciplines, and series/occupational
code(s) sought) to the DoD IASP Executive Administrator.

    b. Coordinate with human resources/recruitment offices to confirm DoD Component hiring
abilities, ensuring resourced billets are available for graduating recruitment students selected.

   c. Coordinate and distribute scholarship applicant review documents.

   d. Identify technical DoD Component personnel who will review applicant credentials.

   e. Complete required documentation during the student review process, including:

       (1) Conflict-of-interest statements, which must be completed by evaluators for any
university or student with whom the evaluator has a perceived conflict of interest (e.g., personal
knowledge of student applicant).

       (2) Non-disclosure sheet for each school reviewed.

       (3) An assessment sheet for each student evaluated.

       (4) Rank ordering of DoD Component selections and designated alternates.


2. SCHOLARSHIP APPLICANT NOMINATION. Students are nominated for the DoD IASP
by participating CAEs. Each CAE is responsible for assessing each applicant’s package and
rating the candidates as “highly recommended,” “recommended,” or “not recommended.” All
applicant packages are forwarded to the DoD IASP Executive Administrator by February 28th of
each year.


3. SCHOLARSHIP APPLICANT REVIEW. The DoD IASP Executive Administrator provides
each participating DoD Component with a summary listing of annual recruitment applicants.



Change 1, 07/28/2017                            17           APPENDIX 3 TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


The summary listing includes each student’s academic major, GPA, projected degree, and final
graduation date; comments on the student’s knowledge, skills, and attributes; and the CAE
assessment rating. In addition, the participating Components are provided with a complete
applicant package for each student who has been rated as “highly recommended” by the
nominating CAE. Packets are mailed to the participating Components by March 31st annually.

    a. All students rated as “highly recommended or “recommended” are considered qualified
applicants. Participating DoD Components may request additional packets on recommended
students from the DoD IASP Executive Administrator.

   b. Participating DoD Components may choose to evaluate students pursuing a specific
major, those from a specific region or university, or to evaluate individuals with diverse
educational backgrounds if the organization requires various types of expertise in IA/IT.

   c. Copies of all evaluations and non-disclosure agreements from all DoD Component
evaluators must be provided to the DoD IASP Executive Administrator for the record.

  d. The list of selected scholarship applicants is finalized by April 30th each year. DoD
Component evaluators are eligible to attend the final selection meeting.


4. SCHOLARSHIP RECIPIENT NOTIFICATION. Student notifications are issued no later
than the first week in May. The DoD IASP Executive Administrator will notify students of the
DoD Component selection through their respective university.


5. STUDENT ACCEPTANCE. Students are required to sign a participation agreement by
May 31st. Once the signed student agreements have been received by the DoD IASP Executive
Administrator, copies will be provided to the appropriate sponsoring DoD Component.


6. STUDENT HIRING. The student hiring process begins as soon as the DoD Component
receives a copy of the student participation agreement, signed by the student, from the DoD
IASP Executive Administrator.

   a. In order to facilitate the student hiring process, DoD Components shall:

       (1) Establish contact with students and their school’s principal investigators.

       (2) Provide students with required hiring forms and procedures.

       (3) Initiate security clearances within 90 days of a student’s acceptance into the
       scholarship program.

       (4) Assign mentors to recruitment students.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                            18          APPENDIX 3 TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


       (5) Notify the DoD IASP Executive Administrator regarding any delays or impediments
       to the hiring process.

    b. Pursuant to the authority granted in section 2200a(g) of Reference (a) and the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Memorandum (Reference (m)), DoD
Components may appoint DoD IASP graduates to IT positions as members of the excepted
service. Upon satisfactory completion of 2 years of substantially continuous service,
Components may then convert these individuals to career or career-conditional appointments
without competition.


7. QUARTERLY STUDENT STATUS REPORTING. The DoD Components participating in
the DoD IASP recruitment program shall frequently communicate with their recruitment students
and provide a quarterly update to the DoD IASP Executive Administrator on their students’
status.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                          19          APPENDIX 3 TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


 AFIT                  Air Force Institute of Technology
 ASD(NII/DoD           Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information
 CIO)                  Integration/Department of Defense Chief Information Officer

 CAE                   Center of Academic Excellence
 CAE/IAE               Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education
 CAE-R                 Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Research

 DIRNSA                Director, National Security Agency
 DoD IASP              Department of Defense Information Assurance Scholarship Program

 GMAT                  Graduate Management Admissions Test
 GPA                   grade point average
 GRE                   Graduate Record Examination
 GS                    General Schedule

 IA                    information assurance
 IRMC                  Information Resources Management College
 IT                    information technology

 MS                    Master of Science

 NIETP                 National Information Assurance Education and Training Program
 NPS                   Naval Postgraduate School
 NSA                   National Security Agency

 Ph.D.                 Doctor of Philosophy

 WO                    Warrant Officer


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

The following terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this Instruction.

CAE. A collective term that refers to both CAE/IAE and CAE-R.

CAE/IAE. An institution of higher education that has met established criteria for IA education
and has been jointly designated by the Department of Homeland Security and the NSA as a
national center of excellence.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                            20                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 8145.01, January 17, 2012


CAE-R. An institution of higher education which has met established criteria for IA research
and has been jointly designated by the Department of Homeland Security and the NSA as a
national center of excellence.

IA. Includes computer security, network security, cybersecurity, cyber operations, and other
relevant IT related to information assurance per section 2200e(1) of Reference (a).

institution of higher education. Defined in section 1001 of title 20, U.S.C. (Reference (n)).

IT. Defined in section 11101 of title 40, U.S.C. (Reference (o)). For the purpose of this
Instruction, this definition specifically applies to a DoD Component or a contractor under a
contract with a DoD Component.

partner university. A CAE that has joined in academic partnership with the NDU IRMC to
award master’s and doctoral degrees through the DoD IASP.

principal investigator. The primary point of contact at each CAE, responsible for publicizing the
DoD IASP to potential recruitment students and working with students during the application
process. Principal investigators also serve as the primary contact for recruitment students and
retention students who have transferred from the IRMC to a partner university.

recruitment program. The portion of the DoD IASP available to qualified non-DoD students
currently enrolled or accepted for enrollment at a designated CAE.

recruitment students. Non-DoD students currently enrolled at a designated CAE who are active
participants in the DoD IASP recruitment program.

retention program. The portion of the DoD IASP available to full-time, active duty Service
personnel and permanent civilian employees of the DoD Components.

retention students. Full-time, active duty Service personnel and permanent civilian employees of
the DoD Components who are active participants in the DoD IASP retention program.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                            21                                   GLOSSARY
