                              Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 4650.01
                                                                                 January 9, 2009
                                                        Incorporating Change 1, October 17, 2017

                                                                                         DoD CIO

SUBJECT:      Policy and Procedures for Management and Use of the Electromagnetic Spectrum

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 4650.1 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction in
accordance with the guidance in DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5025.01 (Reference (b)) and the
authority in DoDD 5144.02 (Reference (c)).

    b. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides instructions for management and
use of the electromagnetic spectrum in accordance with Reference (c).

    c. Implements section 305 and chapter 8 of title 47, United States Code (Reference (d));
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-11, Part 2, Sec. 33.4 (Reference (e)); and
the Manual of Regulations and Procedures for Radio Frequency Management (Reference (f)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”).

   b. The United States Coast Guard. The United States Coast Guard will adhere to DoD
requirements, standards, and policies in this instruction in accordance with the direction in
Paragraph 4a of the Memorandum of Agreement Between the Department of Defense and the
Department of Homeland Security (Reference (p)).
                                                                   DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The electromagnetic spectrum (hereafter referred to as “spectrum”) is a critical resource,
and access to the spectrum is vital to the support of military operations. Proper management and
use of the spectrum available to the Department of Defense shall be an integral part of military
planning, research, development, testing, and operations involving spectrum-dependent (S-D)
systems.

    b. Spectrum policy and spectrum management functions shall be guided by the following
core principles:

       (1) Ensure the U.S. warfighter has sufficient spectrum access to support military
capabilities.

       (2) Support a U.S. spectrum policy that balances national and economic security, with
national security as the first priority.

        (3) Use the spectrum as efficiently and effectively as practical to provide the greatest
overall benefit to warfighting capability.

        (4) Pursue spectrum-efficient technologies to support the increasing warfighter demand
for spectrum access and encourage development of S-D systems that can operate in diverse
electromagnetic environments (EMEs).

        (5) Actively support U.S. policies and interests in international spectrum bodies and in
international and bilateral negotiations for spectrum allocation and use.

   c. DoD Components shall comply with U.S. (Reference (f)) and host nation (HN) spectrum
regulations and obtain applicable authorizations before operating S-D systems.

    d. DoD Components shall obtain U.S. Government (USG) certification of spectrum support,
as required by Reference (f), prior to authorization to operate for experimental testing,
developmental testing, or operations of S-D systems in the United States and its possessions
(US&P). As required by Reference (e), USG certification of spectrum support shall be obtained
prior to submission of cost estimates (i.e., prior to Defense Acquisition System Milestone B
(Reference (i)) for development or procurement of major S-D systems and for all space and
satellite systems. In addition, some HNs require their own certification before providing
authorization to operate.

    e. For all S-D systems, DoD Components shall determine if there will be sufficient spectrum
to support operation of the system during its life cycle. In order to affect design and procurement
decisions, DoD Components shall:




Change 1, 10/17/2017                             2
                                                                  DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


       (1) Identify spectrum-related risks as early as possible via spectrum supportability risk
assessments.

       (2) Review these assessments at acquisition milestones.

       (3) Manage the risks throughout the system’s lifecycle.

    f. To facilitate planning, DoD Components shall ensure current and complete technical
performance (parametric) data on S-D systems is captured in DoD spectrum management
databases.

   g. In accordance with Reference (f), DoD Components shall consider sharing the spectrum
with other Federal agencies and with commercial spectrum users. Sharing of spectrum shall be
accomplished:

       (1) Without degradation to the DoD mission.

        (2) In a manner that provides current and future DoD users with sufficient regulatory
protection.

       (3) With minimal risk that such sharing will result in loss of access to the spectrum
necessary to perform the DoD mission.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective January 9, 2009.




Change 1, 10/17/2017                            3
                             DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   Glossary




Change 1, 10/17/2017     4
                                                              DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 4650.1, “Policy for Management and Use of the Electromagnetic
      Spectrum,” June 8, 2004 (hereby canceled)
(b)   DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended
(c)   DoD Directive 5144.02, “DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO),” November 21,
      2014, as amended
(d)   Section 305 and Chapter 8 of title 47, United States Code
(e)   Part 2, Section 33.4 of Office of Management and Budget Circular A-11, “Preparing and
      Submitting Budget Estimates,” as amended
(f)   National Telecommunications and Information Administration, “Manual of Regulations
      and Procedures for Federal Radio Frequency Management,” as amended
(g)   DoD Instruction 3222.03, “DoD Electromagnetic Environmental Effects (E3) Program,”
      August 25, 2014, as amended
(h)   DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003, as amended
(i)   DoD Instruction 5000.2, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,” December 2,
      2008
(j)   National Security Space Acquisition Policy 03-01, “Guidance for DoD Space System
      Acquisition Process,” December 27, 2004
(k)   DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major
      Components,” December 21, 2010
(l)   International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Radio Regulations, as amended
(m)   DoD Directive 5100.03, “Support of the Headquarters of Combatant and Subordinate
      Unified Commands,” February 9, 2011, as amended
(n)   DoD Instruction 8330.01, “Interoperability of Information Technology (IT), Including
      National Security Systems (NSS),” May 21, 2014, as amended
(o)   Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
      Associated Terms,” as amended
(p)   Memorandum of Agreement between the Department of Defense and The Department of
      Homeland Security Regarding Department of Defense and U.S. Coast Guard Cooperation
      on Cybersecurity and Cyberspace Operations, January 19, 2017




Change 1, 10/17/2017                          5                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. DoD CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (DoD CIO). The DoD CIO, as the Principal Staff
Assistant on spectrum matters within the Department of Defense, nationally, and internationally,
and in addition to the responsibilities in paragraph 5 of this enclosure, shall:

  a. Establish policy, oversee its implementation, and provide direction and guidance for all
DoD matters related to the electromagnetic spectrum in accordance with Reference (c).

    b. Provide direction and guidance for DoD implementation of USG spectrum management
policies (References (d) and (f)) and applicable international spectrum management policies.

    c. Provide, in coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, guidance
with respect to spectrum management and use by intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
sites, platforms, and activities.

    d. Provide direction for the development of DoD positions for, and DoD participation in,
international and regional spectrum forums, including national, regional, and international
preparatory activities for the International Telecommunication Union World Radio
Communication Conferences.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM AGENCY (DISA). The Director,
DISA, under the authority, direction, and control of the DoD CIO and in addition to the
responsibilities in paragraph 5 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Provide for the development of integrated spectrum plans and long-term strategies to
address current and future needs for DoD spectrum access.

    b. Provide spectrum management support to the DoD CIO, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, Combatant Commanders (CCDRs), Secretaries of Military Departments, and Directors
of Defense Agencies.

   c. Provide support to the DoD CIO on national and international spectrum issues and in the
pursuit of emerging spectrum technologies in DoD acquisitions.

   d. Establish and maintain a capability to perform required electromagnetic compatibility
(EMC) analyses and studies to support effective use of spectrum-dependent systems in EMEs
and accomplish national security and military objectives in accordance with DoDI 3222.03
(Reference (g)).

    e. Develop and maintain a Defense Spectrum Management Architecture, a key component of
the Global Information Grid Architecture.



Change 1, 10/17/2017                           6                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009



    f. Develop, maintain, and enhance DoD joint standard spectrum management information
systems and components, to include DoD spectrum management-related databases and analytical
tools and capabilities.

    g. Provide, when requested or authorized by the DoD CIO, representation to non-IRAC
national and/or international spectrum-related forums.

   h. Provide members to Military Command, Control, Communications and Computers
Executive Board (MC4EB) and its panels and working groups.


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L), in addition to the responsibilities in paragraph 5
of this enclosure, shall:

   a. As the DoD Acquisition Executive, ensure the policies outlined in section 4 of the front
matter of this Instruction are:

       (1) Incorporated into the DoD 5000 series acquisition documents (DoDD 5000.01 and
DoDI 5000.2 (References (h) and (i)) and National Security Space Acquisition Policy 03-01
(Reference (j))).

       (2) Adequately addressed during system acquisitions.

    b. Promote innovative, spectrum-efficient technologies to optimize use and effectiveness of
available spectrum resources in all acquisitions including advanced concept development,
international cooperative programs, and evolutionary acquisitions.


4. DIRECTOR, OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION (DOT&E). The DOT&E, in
addition to the responsibilities in paragraph 5 of this enclosure, shall ensure spectrum
requirements are considered during evaluations and assessments of acquisition programs under
test and evaluation oversight.


5. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

   a. Implement applicable provisions of References (e), (f), and (g) regarding spectrum
management.

    b. Develop procedures to implement the policies in section 4 of the front matter of this
Instruction to include:

       (1) Procedures to obtain USG and HN government authorization to operate S-D systems.




Change 1, 10/17/2017                            7                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


       (2) Procedures to obtain USG and HN certification of spectrum support.

       (3) Procedures to determine if there will be sufficient spectrum to support operation of
the S-D system during its life cycle.

        (4) Procedures to identify and mitigate, as early as possible, spectrum supportability
risks using spectrum supportability risk assessments.

        (5) Procedures to ensure current and complete technical performance (parametric) data
on their S-D systems are captured in DoD spectrum management databases.

    c. Promote the use of innovative spectrum-efficient technologies and development of
systems that can operate in diverse EMEs.

    d. Use DoD joint standard spectrum management information systems, databases, analytical
tools and information exchange formats; and develop, maintain, and enhance spectrum-related
analytical tools to support unique Component capabilities.


6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities in paragraph 5 of this enclosure, shall:

  a. Implement spectrum management policies in accordance with this and other applicable
DoD issuances by issuing guidance within their respective Military Departments.

   b. Provide representatives to the Interdepartment Radio Advisory Committee (IRAC) and its
substructure, per Reference (f), to represent respective departmental interests.

    c. Provide, when requested or authorized by the DoD CIO, representation at non-IRAC
national and/or international spectrum-related forums.

    d. Ensure their respective Department’s spectrum management interests are represented on
the MC4EB and its panels and working groups.

    e. Develop and maintain a cadre of qualified spectrum management personnel to support
planning and warfighting efforts.


7. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, in addition to the responsibilities in paragraph 5 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Represent the interests of the CCDRs related to spectrum management matters per DoDD
5100.01 (Reference (k)).

   b. Authorize the Chair of the MC4EB to recommend spectrum management policies and
procedures to the DoD CIO.



Change 1, 10/17/2017                             8                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009



    c. Provide, on behalf of the CCDRs and in coordination with DoD CIO, operational direction
related to spectrum management matters to the Director, DISA.




Change 1, 10/17/2017                          9                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. USG AND HN REQUIREMENTS

   a. USG Certification of Spectrum Support

        (1) Certification of spectrum support shall be obtained as required (Reference f) prior to
authorization to operate for experimental testing (Stage 2), developmental testing (Stage 3), or
operations (Stage 4) of S-D systems. (See Chapter 10 of Reference (f) for descriptions of the
Stages of Certification.) Electronic attack systems, while S-D, are excluded from this
requirement within the US&P (Reference (f)), but are not excluded from other requirements in
this Instruction.

       (2) DoD Components shall request certification of spectrum support using procedures in
References (f).

       (3) Additionally, as required by Reference (e), this certification must be completed prior
to submission of cost estimates for development or procurement of major S-D systems and for all
space and satellite systems.

        (4) Additional coordination is required for satellite systems per References (f) and (l).
Information required for requesting either an exemption from the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) registration or advanced publication, coordination, and
notification of a particular space system must be submitted to the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration (NTIA).

    b. HN Certification of Spectrum Support. DoD Components shall request HN certification
of spectrum support for S-D systems using procedures established CCDR agreements with HNs.
Requirements for certification vary by HN.

   c. USG Authorization to Operate (Frequency Assignment)

       (1) DoD Components shall request authorization to operate S-D systems in the US&P
using procedures in Reference (f).

       (2) Military Departments shall support Combatant Commands’ requests for authorization
to operate as outlined in DoDD 5100.3 (Reference (m)).

   d. HN Authorization to Operate (Frequency Assignment). DoD Components shall request
HN authorization to operate S-D systems using procedures established in CCDR agreements
with HNs. Requirements for authorizations to operate vary by HN.




Change 1, 10/17/2017                            10                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


2. SPECTRUM SUPPORTABILITY RISK ASSESSMENTS (SSRAs)

    a. DoD Components’ S-D system developers shall identify and mitigate regulatory,
technical, and operational spectrum supportability risks using suggested tasks in the appendix to
this enclosure. DoD Components’ S-D system developers shall increase the detail of these risk
assessments as the S-D system’s design matures.

    b. DoD Components’ S-D system developers shall assess the risk for harmful interference
with other S-D systems and/or harmful radiation-related effects. At a minimum, electromagnetic
interference (EMI) and electromagnetic compatibility assessments shall be made (Reference (g)).

   c. DoD Components’ S-D system developers shall manage spectrum supportability risks
with other developmental risks through systems engineering processes (Reference (i)).

    d. DoD Components' S-D system developers are encouraged to initiate the SSRA in order to
help identify regulatory, technical, and operational risks while completing the appropriate stage
of certification of spectrum support.

   e. Complex “family of systems” or “system-of-systems” may require more than one SSRA.


3. ACQUISITION OVERSIGHT OF SPECTRUM SUPPORTABILITY RISKS

    a. Prior to acquisition milestones, DoD Components’ S-D system developers shall provide
their SSRAs to their Chief Information Officers (CIOs) or another office designated by their
Component Head.

    b. DoD Component CIOs or other designated office shall review the SSRAs and provide
recommendations to inform Milestone Decision Authority decisions (see Table 1).

   c. In addition, DoD Components’ S-D system developers shall update their SSRAs prior to
requesting authorization to operate (for other than testing) in the United States or in HNs.

   d. For information technology and national security systems subject to DoDI 8330.01
(Reference (n)), DoD Components shall include SSRAs in the Information Support Plan in
accordance with that DoDI.




Change 1, 10/17/2017                           11                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                          DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009



                 Table 1. Acquisition Oversight of Spectrum Supportability Risks

                                                      ENGINEERING
                                                          AND
  DEFENSE        MATERIEL                                                     PRODUCTION          OPERATIONS
                               TECHNOLOGY            MANUFACTURING
 ACQUISITION     SOLUTION                                                         AND                AND
                               DEVELOPMENT            DEVELOPMENT
SYSTEM PHASE     ANALYSIS                                                     DEPLOYMENT           SUPPORT
                                                          AND
                                                     DEMONSTRATION
                                                                                REQUEST
                                                                             AUTHORIZATION
    EVENT           MS A             MS B                    MS C             TO OPERATE -
                                                                              OTHER THAN
                                                                                TESTING
REQUIRED USG
   STAGE OF
CERTIFICATION      Stage 1:        Stage 2:                  Stage 3:            Stage 4:
 OF SPECTRUM      Conceptual     Experimental             Developmental         Operational
 SUPPORT FOR
 EACH EVENT

                    Initial
   REQUIRED                                           Detailed Regulatory    Updated Regulatory
                  Regulatory
     SSRA                                                    SSRA                  SSRA
                    SSRA
COMPONENTS
   FOR EACH
  EVENT (SEE                                                Detailed
                               Initial Technical                             Updated Technical
 APPENDIX TO                                                Technical
                                     SSRA                                         SSRA
     THIS                                                    SSRA
 ENCLOSURE
     FOR                                                                         Updated
                               Initial Operational
DESCRIPTIONS)                                                                   Operational
                                      SSRA
                                                                                  SSRA


4. S-D SYSTEM TECHNICAL DATA. S-D system technical data is required for tactical
military planning, USG spectrum usage planning, and as input to radio frequency propagation
and interference assessment tools.

    a. DoD Components shall provide current and complete technical performance (parametric)
data on their S-D systems to DISA throughout the system’s lifecycle in accordance with MC4EB
procedures.

   b. DISA shall establish and maintain data standards and data collection procedures in
coordination with DoD Components.


Appendix
   Spectrum Supportability Risk Assessments - Suggested Tasks


Change 1, 10/17/2017                                 12                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


                                 APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3

       SPECTRUM SUPPORTABILITY RISK ASSESSMENTS – SUGGESTED TASKS.

                               Table 2. SSRA Suggested Tasks

                                                   Regulatory

  Initial       Determine countries for likely operational deployment within each CCDR area
Regulatory       of responsibility.
  SSRA          Determine the internationally recognized radio service of all S-D sub-systems.
  Tasks         Identify portions of the system’s tuning range supported by each HN’s table of
                 frequency allocation.
                Determine the relative regulatory status, for example, co-primary or secondary,
                 assigned to the radio service by the HN’s table of frequency allocations.
                Obtain international comments on U.S. military systems of the same radio
                 service and with similar technical characteristics submitted for HN spectrum
                 certification (available via the DoD Host-Nation Worldwide Database Online).
                Identify other U.S. military, U.S. civil, and non-U.S. co-band and adjacent-band
                 and harmonically-related systems likely to be co-site or in close proximity by
                 querying DoD system databases or the appropriate NTIA database.
                Identify risks and develop recommendations for mitigation of regulatory issues.
 Detailed       Address MC4EB, NTIA and other guidance resulting from the certification of
Regulatory       spectrum support process.
  SSRA          Consult with the DoD Component spectrum management office regarding
  Tasks          changes to U.S. Federal or civil telecommunication regulations impacting the
                 system’s frequency bands.
                Determine if the system meets appropriate military, U.S. national, and
                 international spectrum standards for radiated bandwidth and transmitter
                 characteristics.
                Quantify the impacts of any changes to USG or international spectrum
                 regulations or technical sharing criteria.
                Identify risks and develop recommendations for mitigation of regulatory issues.
 Updated        Address MC4EB, NTIA and other guidance resulting from the certification of
Regulatory       spectrum support process.
  SSRA          Consult with the DoD Component spectrum management office regarding
  Tasks          changes to U.S. Federal or civil telecommunication regulations impacting the
                 system’s frequency bands.
                Identify risks and develop recommendations for mitigation of regulatory issues.
                                                   Technical

 Initial        Determine candidate technologies and their technical parameters:
Technical           o Application: fixed, transportable, mobile
 SSRA               o Host platform (dismounted soldier, airborne, tactical operations center,
 Tasks                 etc.)
                    o Frequency range of operation


Change 1, 10/17/2017                          13                APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


                    o Required data throughput
                    o Receiver selectivity
                    o Receiver criteria required for desired operation
                    o Required radiated bandwidth
                    o Transmitter power output
                    o Antenna performance characteristics
                    o Anticipated HNs for deployment
               Perform an initial EMC analysis to identify electromagnetic interactions that
                require further study. The analysis should use, as a minimum, technical
                parameters for the candidate system and the technical parameters of S-D
                systems expected to be in the candidate’s operational environment.
               Evaluate the initial system parameters with respect to U.S. and appropriate
                international spectrum standards; develop plans to address non-compliant
                systems.
               Identify risks and develop recommendations for mitigation of technical issues.
Detailed       Evaluate system’s performance and effect on other S-D system that operates co-
Technical       frequency or adjacent frequency expected to be found in the intended
 SSRA           operational environment.
 Tasks         Determine the acceptable received interference level between the system being
                analyzed and other spectrum-dependent systems to ensure neither is
                significantly degraded and that coexistence is feasible.
               Use measured performance of the system’s receiver, transmitter, antenna, and
                appropriate propagation models whenever feasible.
               Use propagation models developed specifically for mobile communications
                systems to determine any potential link degradation and blockage due to
                atmospheric conditions or terrain and building obstructions within intended
                deployments areas.
               Consider overall system performance to include link availability, with and
                without interference, while taking into account the effects of the environment
                (e.g., considering path loss, rain attenuation, humidity, climate, temperature,
                and water and oxygen absorption).
               For non-communications systems (radar, passive sensors, etc.), determine the
                appropriate operational degradation as a function of the level of received
                environmental and co-site interference.
               Quantify intra-platform EMC among co-sited emitters and receivers for
                complex “system-of-systems” platforms in terms of the possibility and
                influence of:
                    o Inter-modulation
                    o Transmitter Harmonic Interference
                    o Transmitter Spurious Output Interference
                    o Transmitter Noise Interference
                    o Receiver Desensitization Interference
               Compare the measured system parameters with U.S. national and appropriate
                international spectrum standards.
               Generate technical recommendations regarding mitigating potential interference
                by implementing channelization plans, advanced narrow-beam antennas,


Change 1, 10/17/2017                         14              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


                (active, spot and contoured-beam, etc.), as well as use of passive radio
                frequency components (filters, diplexers, couplers, etc.).
               Identify risks and develop recommendations for mitigation of technical issues.
Updated        Quantify impact of changes to the operational “signals-in-space” radio
Technical       frequency parameters to co-site EMC and E3.
 SSRA          Identify risks and develop recommendations for mitigation of technical issues.
 Tasks

                                                  Operational

  Initial      Determine the expected complement of S-D systems anticipated to be in the
Operational     system’s operating environment. The system should operate without
  SSRA          experiencing or causing interference as part of the DoD response to
  Tasks         conventional and non-conventional (disaster relief) missions.
               Perform a more extensive EMC analysis quantifying the potential interference
                between the candidate system and the S-D systems used by other DoD units in
                the operational environment. Express the results in operational terms, e.g., the
                frequency-distance separation requirements between a transmitter and a receiver
                that must be maintained to achieve compatibility.
               Identify risks and develop recommendations for mitigation of technical issues.
 Updated       Refine the expected complement of S-D systems anticipated to be in the
Operational     system’s operating environments.
  SSRA         Refine the EMC analysis quantifying the mutual interference between the
  Tasks         candidate system and the S-D systems used by other DoD units in the
                operational environment.
               Identify risks and develop recommendations for mitigation of technical issues.




Change 1, 10/17/2017                         15                 APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009


                                         GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CIO                    chief information officer
CCDR                   Combatant Commander

DISA                   Defense Information Systems Agency
DoD CIO                DoD Chief Information Officer
DoDD                   Department of Defense Directive
DoDI                   Department of Defense Instruction

E3                     electromagnetic environmental effects
EMC                    electromagnetic compatibility
EME                    electromagnetic environment
EMI                    electromagnetic interference

HN                     host nation

IRAC                   Interdepartment Radio Advisory Committee
ISP                    Information Support Plan
ITU                    International Telecommunication Union

MC4EB                  Military Command, Control, Communications, and Computers Executive
                       Board

MILDEP                 Military Department

NTIA                   National Telecommunications and Information Administration

OMB                    Office of Management and Budget

S-D                    spectrum-dependent
SSRA                   spectrum supportability risk assessment

USG                    United States Government
US&P                   United States and its possessions




Change 1, 10/17/2017                           16                          GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDI 4650.01, January 9, 2009



                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

EMC. Defined in the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference (o)).

EME. Defined in Reference (o).

E3. Defined in Reference (o).

electromagnetic spectrum. Defined in Reference (o). The terms “electromagnetic spectrum” and
“spectrum” are synonymous.

certification of spectrum support. Certification by the NTIA that a candidate system conforms to
the US&P spectrum allocation scheme. Requirements for obtaining spectrum support for new
telecommunications systems or major modifications of an existing system are found in Chapter
10 of Reference (f). Some HNs have similar certifications but requirements vary.

HN. Defined in Reference (o).

S-D systems. All electronic systems, subsystems, devices, and/or equipment that depend on the
use of the spectrum to properly accomplish their function(s) without regard to how they were
acquired (full acquisition, rapid acquisition, Joint Concept Technology Demonstration, etc.) or
procured (commercial off-the-shelf, government off-the-shelf, non-developmental items, etc.).

SSRA. Risk assessment performed by DoD Components for all S-D systems to identify risks as
early as possible and affect design and procurement decisions. These risks are reviewed at
acquisition milestones and are managed throughout the system’s lifecycle.




Change 1, 10/17/2017                            17                             GLOSSARY
