                                Department of Defense
                                     DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 5105.23
                                                                                   June 28, 2011
                                              Incorporating Change 1, Effective October 29, 2015

                                                                                            DCMO

SUBJECT:      National Reconnaissance Office (NRO)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE.

    a. Pursuant to the authorities vested in the Secretary of Defense by title 10, United States
Code (U.S.C.); title 50, U.S.C.; and Executive Order (E.O.) 12333 (References (a) through (c)),
and pursuant to the Secretary of Defense-Director of National Intelligence (DNI) Memorandum
of Agreement (MoA) of September 21, 2010 and DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01 (References
(d) and (e)), this Directive reissues DoDD 5105.23 (Reference (f)) to update the mission,
organization and management, responsibilities and functions, relationships, authorities, and
administration of the NRO. This Directive shall be interpreted consistent with law, policy, and
directive, including, as applicable, those related to the DNI and existing parent element
agreements. This Directive addresses the roles and responsibilities of the NRO within the DoD
and acknowledges interdependencies with parent elements, other government agencies (OGAs),
and the DNI, as appropriate.

   b. Incorporates and cancels Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference(g)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies,
the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. MISSION. The NRO is responsible for research and development (R&D), acquisition,
launch, deployment, and operation of overhead reconnaissance systems, and related
                                                                   DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


data-processing facilities to collect intelligence and information to support national and DoD
missions and other United States Government (USG) needs, pursuant to Reference (d).


5. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

    a. The NRO is a Defense Agency. The Secretary of Defense exercises authority, direction,
and control over the NRO, pursuant to References (a) and (b) and other applicable authorities.
The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) exercises the authority, direction, and
control of the Secretary of Defense over the Director, NRO (DNRO), pursuant to section 192(a)
of Reference (a) and section 4.a.(2) of Reference (e).

    b. The NRO shall consist of a Director, a Principal Deputy Director, a Deputy Director, and
such subordinate organizational elements as are established by the Director within the resources
assigned by the Secretary of Defense, the DNI, or OGAs, as appropriate.

    c. The NRO is also an element of the Intelligence Community (IC), subject to the oversight
of the DNI, pursuant to References (b), (c), and (d). The DNI provides objectives, priorities, and
guidance for, determines requirements and the budget of, and exercises transfer and
reprogramming authorities over the National Intelligence Program (NIP) portion of the NRO
budget. The DNI also exercises National Intelligence tasking and oversight; authorities for IC-
wide policies relating to personnel, acquisition management, security, information technology,
education, and training; oversight of intelligence coordination with foreign governments and
international organizations; and other applicable authorities over the NRO, pursuant to
References (b) and (c). The DNRO shall keep the USD(I) fully informed of all National
Intelligence activities undertaken by the NRO that are tasked by the DNI consistent with
Reference (d) and the Secretary of Defense and DNI MoA (Reference (h)). The DNRO shall
assist the Secretary of Defense and the DNI in their respective responsibilities to manage,
develop, and ensure implementation of policies, principles, standards, and guidelines for the
security of information systems supporting the operations under their respective control, as well
as supporting the operations of OGAs with national security information.

    d. The DNRO shall also advise the DNI and Director of Defense Intelligence (DDI), as
appropriate, and as established by Reference (h), on all matters under the purview of the DNI
concerning overhead reconnaissance. The DDI will advise the DNI on critical deficiencies and
strengths regarding overhead reconnaissance-related Defense Intelligence capabilities after
coordination with the DNRO, and provide assessments on the effect of such deficiencies and
strengths in meeting National Intelligence objectives.


6. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS. The DNRO, under the authority, direction, and
control of the USD(I), serves as the principal advisor on overhead reconnaissance to the
Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commanders, the
Secretary of the Air Force, and the DoD Executive Agent (EA) for Space. The DNRO is
responsible for the management and operations of the NRO, its program activities, and the
acquisition of NRO systems. The DNRO directs and manages all assigned resources to provide



Change 1, 10/29/2015                            2
                                                                     DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


peacetime, contingency, crisis, and combat overhead reconnaissance support to the Armed
Forces of the United States, and delivers intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
capabilities, information products, services, and tools in response to national-level tasking in
coordination with the Functional Managers. The DNRO shall receive and implement Secretary
of Defense and DNI guidance and direction by establishing strategic guidance, policy, and
procedures for the execution of the NRO mission and the accomplishment of DNRO National
Security Space (NSS) responsibilities. In the fulfillment of these responsibilities, the DNRO
shall:

   a. Operations

       (1) General

           (a) Set, control, direct, and standardize policies, procedures, standards, infrastructure
systems, and operations within the NRO.

             (b) Pursuant to Reference (d), the MoA between the Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) and the NRO (Reference (i)), and the CIA Executive Director Memorandum (Reference
(j)), negotiate and maintain formal agreements with parent elements to ensure the NRO is staffed
with qualified permanent NRO DoD civilians; CIA detailees, and assignees; and detailees from
other DoD Components, other IC elements, and OGAs as necessary and to address delegation of
authority requirements in order to assemble high-quality leadership and workforce with domain
or other appropriate enabling functional experience for tours of duty that promote continuity of
effort. The resulting NRO workforce shall act as a unified staff supporting the NRO mission.
Formal agreements between DNRO and the Heads of other DoD Components, other IC
elements, or OGAs shall be used to address staffing and delegations of authority requirements.
Any existing agreements between agencies relating to staffing, authorities, and delegations of
authorities remain in effect unless and until formally revoked or modified according to the terms
of those agreements.

            (c) Ensure that the NRO is responsive to its organizational customer requirements
and that their levels of satisfaction are ascertained and factored into program execution and
measures are taken to improve responsiveness, as appropriate.

       (2) Support to the Armed Forces of the United States and the IC

             (a) Carry out operational responsibilities for launch integration of NRO spacecraft,
spacecraft command and control, and overhead reconnaissance data processing, and manage
facilities required for these functions.

           (b) Provide communications, collection capabilities, and related data processing
based on validated capabilities requirements in support of DoD, IC, and other USG needs.
Collected data shall be processed and handled in accordance with the laws and policies of the
supported USG entity.




Change 1, 10/29/2015                             3
                                                                    DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


            (c) Plan and provide for survival, recovery, and reconstitution of NRO mission-
essential functions, pursuant to DoDD 3020.26 (Reference (k)).

       (3) Security

           (a) Establish security control policies and procedures that incorporate requirements
of DoD Manual (DoDM) 5200.0, (Reference (l)) and applicable Intelligence Community
Directives (ICDs), and that are consistent with DoD and Office of the DNI (ODNI) guidance, as
appropriate.

           (b) Operate security programs to protect people, facilities, technology, information
systems, and information.

       (4) Counterintelligence (CI)

            (a) Integrate CI activities into operations, programs, systems, exercises, planning,
doctrine, strategies, policies, and architectures.

          (b) Conduct and report CI activities in accordance with DoDD 5240.02
(Reference (m)).

       (5) Establish and coordinate performance metrics to measure, assess, and improve NRO
overhead reconnaissance programs, operations, activities, and performance.

   b. Principal Advisor for Overhead Reconnaissance

        (1) Establish and chair a senior-level advisory group to advise the DNRO. This group
shall be known as the Overhead Reconnaissance Advisory Group (ORAG). ORAG membership
shall be drawn from key DoD and IC stakeholders, pursuant to Reference (d).

       (2) Provide the principal interface between overhead reconnaissance and other domains.

       (3) Recommend proposed overhead reconnaissance space architectures and appropriate
sustainment plans for established space architectures where the DNRO is responsible.

   c. Support to NSS Activities

        (1) As the Head of a DoD Component and IC element with a unique mission, history,
and organizational composition, the DNRO shares NSS sector leadership and management
responsibilities, and coordinates with other NSS sector stakeholders, such as the Secretary of the
Air Force, the USD(I), the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), the Under Secretary
of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)), the Chief Information
Officer of the Department of Defense, the DoD EA for Space, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, and the Commander, United States Strategic Command (CDRUSSTRATCOM), on
policy and strategy, technology security, export control, and international engagement related to
overhead reconnaissance or other space activities. Those NSS sector stakeholders that have



Change 1, 10/29/2015                             4
                                                                   DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


leadership and management responsibilities should coordinate the aforementioned overhead
reconnaissance or other space activities with the DNRO.

       (2) Serve as a member of the Defense Space Council (DSC), advising the DoD EA for
Space on overhead reconnaissance matters, in order to generate greater synchronization for NSS
programs and planning.

        (3) Lead and manage NRO commercial partnerships, and industrial and supplier base
issues that involve overhead reconnaissance, and consult with the DSC on industrial and supplier
base matters.

        (4) Collaborate with the DoD EA for Space in the development of other space mission
architectures, when appropriate.

       (5) Ensure NRO activities are integrated, when appropriate, within the DoD, and with
programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and OGAs, as well as those
organizations and the governments of allied and friendly countries, as appropriate.

       (6) Maintain partnerships across organizational boundaries with other members of the IC
and other entities, as required, in support of NRO missions and programs to optimize appropriate
DoD technical and operational capabilities and resources.

         (7) Ensure that the Secretary of Defense and the DNI are fully informed of all important
activities of the NRO, including all other space governance processes that are addressed in DoD,
IC, or other USG policy, law, and directives.

   d. Program Activities

       (1) Budgeting and Efficiency

           (a) Prepare a comprehensive NRO program and budget input, pursuant to applicable
Secretary of Defense-DNI guidance and mission requirements, for inclusion in the President’s
NIP and the DoD Military Intelligence Program (MIP), pursuant to DoDD 5205.12
(Reference (n)).

            1. Develop, manage, implement, and conduct the NRP within the NIP and the
NRO Program within the MIP.

               2. Manage the NRP and, in accordance with Reference (n), the NRO MIP.

              3. Develop an integrated NRP/NRO MIP, for the approval of the Secretary of
Defense and the DNI.

           (b) Pursuant to Reference (d) and Secretary of Defense-DNI MoA (Reference (o)),
for wholly or majority NIP-funded NRO programs, budget to Independent Cost Estimates in
accordance with applicable law, and with policy and regulations unless waived by the DNI. For



Change 1, 10/29/2015                            5
                                                                   DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


these NIP-funded NRO programs, the IC shall validate capabilities requirements with the Joint
Staff supporting coordination. For wholly or majority MIP-funded NRO programs, the Joint
Requirements Oversight Council (JROC) shall validate requirements with the IC supporting
coordination.

           (c) Work with the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief
Financial Officer, Department of Defense (OUSD(C)/CFO) and ODNI to ensure proper
budgeting, execution, and accounting of programs. The DNRO needs budget flexibility to
respond to program challenges, including the ability to move funds within and between programs
for budget planning to the fullest extent allowed by law. In cases of successful acquisition
performance or where sufficient risk has been retired, reprogramming of savings may be
permitted in coordination with OUSD(C)/CFO and ODNI, as authorized by law and regulation.

           (d) Develop and manage those MIP resources and capabilities under DNRO purview,
pursuant to Reference (n).

           (e) Ensure that NRO operations are planned and managed in ways that provide for
optimally efficient and effective expenditure and use of all assigned and programmed USG
resources; and that business operations are streamlined, infrastructure and support staffs are
mission essential, and leadership and management are as effective and efficient as possible.

        (2) R&D

              (a) Plan and conduct overhead reconnaissance R&D in support of the NRO mission.

              (b) Manage and direct a science and technology program that underpins NRO R&D
priorities.

        (3) Acquisition

              (a) Serve as the Senior Acquisition Executive for the NRO.

           (b) When and if designated or assigned by the USD(AT&L) and the Assistant DNI
for Acquisition, Technology, and Facilities (ADNI/AT&F) execute milestone decision authority
(MDA) and full program management authority over majority or wholly NIP funded NRO
programs, pursuant to Reference (d).

            (c) When designated or assigned by the USD(AT&L), execute MDA and full
program management authority over majority or wholly MIP-funded NRO programs with ODNI
participation.

            (d) Ensure the active participation of NRO staff at all levels of DoD and IC processes
so that technical and programmatic risk factors are properly considered, when proposed or
ongoing NRO-directed programs are to be considered by either the JROC or IC.




Change 1, 10/29/2015                             6
                                                                   DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


          (e) Be responsive to program review and program management plan processes
conducted by the USD(AT&L) or the ADNI/AT&F.

           (f) Address overhead reconnaissance system requirements established by the
Functional Managers and validated by the JROC and IC requirements process.

   e. NRO Oversight

        (1) Conduct all NRO activities in conformity with applicable law, policy, and
regulations, and report issues or activities that raise questions of legality or propriety to the
USD(I), the Inspector General of the NRO (IG NRO) and the IG DoD, the Department of
Defense Senior Intelligence Oversight Official (DoD SIOO), and, as appropriate, the General
Counsel of the DoD (GC DoD), pursuant to DoDD 5240.01 (Reference (p)) and DoD 5240.1-R
(Reference (q)), and appropriate controls and standards of conduct.

       (2) Comply with applicable laws, requirements, and DoD policies related to the privacy
and civil liberties responsibilities of the DoD.

        (3) As a Defense Intelligence Component, NRO shall ensure that all employees and
subordinate organizations, to include supporting contractors and external laboratories, fully
comply with the intelligence oversight awareness, training, and reporting requirements set forth
in Reference (l), and with additional IC mission partner directives and regulations concerning
intelligence collection, retention, and dissemination. The NRO intelligence oversight
responsibility applies to R&D, acquisition, launch, deployment, and operation of overhead
reconnaissance systems, and related data-processing facilities that collect intelligence and
information.

   f. International Engagement

        (1) Conduct foreign liaison relationships relating to the NRO mission, with the authority
of the Secretary of Defense and/or the DNI, as appropriate, pursuant to Reference (c). As
appropriate, coordinate overhead reconnaissance agreements and arrangements with OGAs.

       (2) Provide technical advice and support on overhead reconnaissance arrangements with
foreign governments and international organizations, and conduct, as authorized, exchanges,
pursuant to References (a) through (d).

        (3) Leverage overhead reconnaissance capabilities of foreign partners with whom NRO
has an established relationship or as directed by the Secretary of Defense or DNI, or as
coordinated with the Director of the National Security Agency (NSA) or the Director of the
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).

    g. Other Duties. Perform those additional activities for the DoD and the IC, and such other
duties as may be directed by the President of the United States, the Secretary of Defense, the
USD(I), or the DNI.




Change 1, 10/29/2015                            7
                                                                   DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011



7. RELATIONSHIPS. The unique mission, history, and organization of the NRO requires that
the DNRO maintain close, integral relationships, through appropriate channels, in a broad array
of partnerships with the heads of OGAs, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Heads of
the other DoD Components, and the Commanders of the Combatant Commands with specific
responsibilities for overhead and space activities in peacetime and wartime. The DNRO must
also maintain close integral relationships with IC and DoD mission partners and Functional
Managers. The following relationships support the DNRO in the performance of assigned
responsibilities and functions:

   a. DNRO. In the execution of duties assigned herein, the DNRO shall:

       (1) Report to the USD(I).

       (2) Report to the Secretary of Defense and the Deputy Secretary of Defense when
circumstances require their immediate attention and/or decision. The DNRO shall inform the
USD(I) in a timely manner when such instances are imminent or have occurred.

       (3) Report to the DNI, consistent with References (a), (b), and (c).

       (4) Communicate directly with the DoD EA for Space and the members of the DSC, as
appropriate.

        (5) Coordinate with the USD(P) and other DoD Officials on matters that relate to DNRO
areas of responsibility, as appropriate.

        (6) Maintain communications with other IC elements, pursuant to Reference (c) and
other applicable authorities.

        (7) Inform the USD(I) in coordination with the DNI and in accordance with procedures
to be established separately by the USD(I) and approved by the Secretary of Defense, when the
NRO has submitted information on the NRO and/or its activities to OGAs.

      (8) Participate in the Secretary of Defense Biennial Review of Defense Agencies and
DoD Field Activities as directed by the Deputy Chief Management Officer of the Department of
Defense (DCMO).

       (9) Notify the USD(I) and the GC, DoD within 90 days of the issuance date when the
DNRO believes a DoD Issuance would damage, limit, or seriously inhibit the NRO from
carrying out its national or DoD missions.

       (10) Obtain concurrence from the Heads of DoD Components on programs for which the
Head of the DoD Component has the primary responsibility and where the NRO has a collateral
responsibility.




Change 1, 10/29/2015                            8
                                                                  DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


     (11) Coordinate with the IC Functional Managers and the DoD Geospatial Intelligence
(GEOINT) Manager on applicable NRO Overhead Reconnaissance activities.

       (12) Identify a Special Communications focal point who will represent NRO interests to
the DoD Special Communications Enterprise Office (SCEO) and the Defense Special
Communications Enterprise Working Group. Provide support to the DoD SCEO in accordance
with DoD Instruction (DoDI) S-3200.17 (Reference (r)).

   b. USD(I). The USD(I) shall:

       (1) Exercise authority, direction, and control over the DNRO in accordance with
References (a) and (e).

       (2) Inform the DNRO when NRO overhead reconnaissance-related information is shared
with the DNI and OGAs, as appropriate.

       (3) Consider and, where appropriate, delegate authority for certain overhead
reconnaissance-related matters to the DNRO, unless prohibited by regulation, E.O., or law.

      (4) Oversee coordination of NRO information management within and among the
Defense Intelligence Components in accordance with DoDM 8910.01(Reference (s)).

    c. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L), in accordance with DoDD 5134.01 (Reference (t)),
shall:

       (1) Oversee, advise, and assist the DNRO on the acquisition process.

       (2) Jointly with the ADNI/AT&F, and as delegated by the Secretary of Defense and
DNI, respectively:

           (a) Exercise the decision to delegate indefinite acquisition MDA to the DNRO as
programs are initiated or at subsequent milestone decision points, if determined appropriate and
agreed to with the ODNI. Delegation of that authority shall continue and shall be reconsidered
only by exception consistent with current DoD and IC acquisition policy.

           (b) Oversee all wholly or majority NIP-funded NRO major system acquisition
programs, and at least once per quarter review and assess program execution. Effective NRO
program execution shall address needs for both transparency and agility to respond to a dynamic
program environment. Oversight of wholly or majority MIP-funded NRO major system
acquisition programs shall be conducted by the USD(AT&L) with ODNI participation. These
acquisition authorities are further described in Reference (o) and ICD 801 “Acquisition”
(Reference (u)).

      (3) Develop relationships with aerospace contractors and other organizations relevant to
the NRO mission for the purposes of improving technological strength.




Change 1, 10/29/2015                            9
                                                                   DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


   d. DoD SIOO. The DoD SIOO shall have access to records and information of the NRO
pursuant to DoDD 5148.11 (Reference (v)) and Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum
(Reference (w)) necessary for the fulfillment of DoD SIOO responsibilities and functions.

    e. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall
facilitate communications with the Combatant Commanders, especially CDRUSSTRATCOM, to
ensure a close working relationship exists between the NRO and the Combatant Commands.

   f. Heads of the DoD Components. The Heads of DoD Components shall:

       (1) Obtain DNRO concurrence on programs for which the NRO has a primary
responsibility, and coordinate with DNRO on programs for which NRO has collateral
responsibility. This includes, but is not limited to, the review and approval of statements of
work, proposed contract changes, and the definition of technical specifications and standards.

         (2) Provide such support to the DNRO, within their capabilities, as may be necessary to
assist the DNRO in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions.

   g. Secretaries of the Military Departments. The Secretaries of the Military Departments, in
addition to the duties in paragraph 7.f. above, shall:

        (1) As heads of parent elements, provide personnel, infrastructure, and resource support
to the NRO as agreed to separately with the USD(I) and the DNRO. Personnel shall have space
domain or other appropriate experience to promote the NRO mission and continuity of effort,
pursuant to Reference (d).

       (2) Collaborate with the DNRO regarding the NRO responsibility to develop and submit
for approval consolidated overhead reconnaissance plans and programs, together with DNRO
recommendations regarding requirements for military and civilian manpower, operating costs,
investment in facilities and capital equipment, R&D, testing, and evaluation.

    h. The Secretary of the Air Force. The Secretary of the Air Force, in addition to paragraph
7.g. of this section, shall:

         (1) Coordinate with the DNRO on the use of military facilities for reconnaissance
satellite launches, in accordance with DoDD 5101.02E (Reference (x)).

       (2) Fulfill responsibilities regarding NRO matters when required and applicable.

       (3) Coordinate with the DNRO on the use of shared resources.

       (4) Serve as the DoD EA for Space, in accordance with Reference (x).

    i. CDRUSSTRATCOM. The CDRUSSTRATCOM shall provide functional and operational
expertise in the employment of space systems. Such expertise shall include, but will not be
limited to: articulation of the military strategy for space operations; identification of military



Change 1, 10/29/2015                           10
                                                                    DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


operational capabilities and objectives for space systems; development of space command and
control operational structures and procedures for employing military space capabilities; and the
development and execution of procedures for sharing space situational awareness information
within the DoD and USG, as well as with authorized non-USG entities. The
CDRUSSTRATCOM, through the Joint Space Operations Center, shall also support the
DNRO’s responsibilities for collision avoidance and management of the exclusion list. They
share management of some facilities, collaborate on a continuing basis to evolve the mission and
improve operational effectiveness, and specifically provide systems to support tasking,
processing, exploitation and dissemination for NRO systems.

    j. Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), Director of the NGA, and Director,
National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service (DIRNSA/CHCSS). The Director of
the DIA, the Director of the NGA, and the DIRNSA/CHCSS, under the authority, direction, and
control of the USD(I), and in addition to duties in paragraph 7.f. above, shall provide expertise,
capabilities, and all available data and information necessary for the DNRO to perform the
responsibilities and functions prescribed herein, within existing resources.


8. AUTHORITIES. The DNRO is hereby delegated authority to:

    a. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry out
assigned responsibilities and functions, including requests for advice and assistance.
Communications to the Military Departments shall be transmitted through the Secretaries of the
Military Departments, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law or as directed by the
Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the Commanders of the
Combatant Commands normally shall be transmitted through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.

     b. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the Legislative Branch,
members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments or other entities, as
appropriate, in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with
representatives of the Legislative Branch shall be coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Legislative Affairs or the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial
Officer, as applicable, and be consistent with the DoD Legislative Program. Those issues that
fall under the purview of the DNI or parent element shall be coordinated with the DNI and
conducted in accordance with DNI or parent element guidance.

    c. Request a meeting with the Secretary of Defense and/or DNI, or their deputies, to discuss
overhead reconnaissance issues, including elevating for decision strategic or programmatic
issues related to DNRO responsibilities, as appropriate or necessary.

    d. Obtain reports and information, pursuant to DoDI 8910.01 (Reference (y)), as necessary,
to carry out assigned responsibilities and functions.

    e. Establish and maintain relationships with foreign governments and other entities,
including commercial relationships, and industrial and supplier base issues that are consistent



Change 1, 10/29/2015                            11
                                                                    DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


with the NRO mission for overhead reconnaissance in accordance with References (a)
through (d).

   f. Publish guidance to the DoD Components in carrying out assigned responsibilities and
functions prescribed herein in accordance with the authorities contained in Enclosure 2.

    g. Ensure that other authorities provided by statute or specifically delegated by the Secretary
of Defense are carried out in support of the NRO mission.

   h. Execute the authorities and responsibilities concerning personnel support established in
References (i) and (j).

   i. Exercise the administrative authorities contained in Enclosure 2.


9. ADMINISTRATION

    a. The DNRO is appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, in accordance with Reference (b). The Principal Deputy Director, NRO, and the Deputy
Director, NRO, are nominated and approved in accordance with Reference (d). The IG NRO is
appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, in accordance with
the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, title 5, U.S.C. Appendix (Reference (z)).

    b. The DNRO shall be authorized such personnel, facilities, funds, and other resources as the
Secretary of Defense deems appropriate, including facilities, services, and other support from the
Military Departments. The DNI, pursuant to DNI authorities, may also authorize such personnel,
facilities, funds, and other resources as appropriate.


10. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Directive is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


11. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance delegate additional authorities
to the Director of the NRO in accordance with the March 06, 2015 Secretary of Defense
Memorandum (Reference (g)). The administrative changes also update titles and references for
accuracy.


12. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective June 28, 2011.




Change 1, 10/29/2015                            12
                                      DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Delegations of Authority
Glossary




Change 1, 10/29/2015             13
                                                                               DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


                                                ENCLOSURE 1

                                                REFERENCES


(a) Title 10, United States Code
(b) Title 50, United States Code
(c) Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981, as
    amended
(d) Memorandum of Agreement between the Secretary of Defense and the Director of National
    Intelligence concerning the National Reconnaissance Office, September 21, 2010
(e) DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)),”
    October 24, 2014, as amended
(f) DoD Directive 5105.23, “National Reconnaissance Office,” March 27, 1964 (hereby
    cancelled)
(g) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Request for Permanent Cadre in the National
    Reconnaissance Office,” March 6, 2015, hereby cancelled
(h) Memorandum of Agreement between the Secretary of Defense and the Director of National
    Intelligence on the Director of Defense Intelligence, May 21, 2007
(i) Memorandum of Agreement between the Central Intelligence Agency and the National
    Reconnaissance Office on Personnel Support Relationships, August 16, 2012
(j) Central Intelligence Agency Executive Director Memorandum, “(U) Concurrence to Create
    the Office of Space Reconnaissance,” September 11, 2014 1
(k) DoD Directive 3020.26, “Department of Defense Continuity Programs,” January 9, 2009
(l) DoD Manual 5200.01, “Information Security Program,” dates vary by volume
(m) DoD Directive 5240.02, “Counterintelligence (CI),” March 17, 2015
(n) DoD Directive 5205.12, “Military Intelligence Program (MIP),” November 14, 2008
(o) Memorandum of Agreement between the Secretary of Defense and the Director of National
    Intelligence, “Management of Acquisition Programs Executed at the Department of
    Defense Intelligence Community Elements,” March 25, 2008
(p) DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(q) DoD Regulation 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence
    Components That Affect United States Persons,” December 1982
(r) DoD Instruction S-3200.17, “Implementing Instructions for the DoD Special
    Communications Enterprise Office (SCEO) (U),” July 15, 2009
(s) DoD Manual 8910.01, “DoD Information Collections Manual,” dates vary by volume
(t) DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
    Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(u) Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 801, “Acquisition,” August 15, 2006
(v) DoD Directive 5148.11, “Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Oversight
    (ATSD(IO)),” April 24, 2013
(w) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Notification of the Realignment of the
    Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Oversight (ATSD(IO)) as the


1
 Copies may be obtained from the Office of the Under Secretary for Intelligence, Intelligence Strategy, Policy, and
Integration, Intelligence Policy via classified networks.
                                                        14                                      ENCLOSURE 1
Change 1, 10/29/2015
                                                             DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


    Department of Defense Senior Intelligence Oversight Official (DoD SIOO),” December 23,
    2014
(x) DoD Directive 5101.02E, “DoD Executive Agent (EA) for Space,” January 25, 2013
(y) DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,” May 19, 2014
(z) Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, title 5, United States Code, Appendix




                                            15                            ENCLOSURE 1
Change 1, 10/29/2015
                                                                    DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                               DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY


Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to the authority,
direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense or the USD(I), and in accordance with
Reference (d), applicable DoD and DNI policies and issuances, the DNRO, or in the absence of
the Director, the person acting for the Director, is hereby delegated authority, as required, in the
administration and operation of NRO for the functions herein. Parent element authorities related
to the functions described below shall be addressed in MoAs, memoranda of understanding, or
other agreements between the DNRO and the applicable head of a parent element.

   a. Human Resources

       (1) Establish an NRO Incentive Awards Board and pay cash awards to, and incur
necessary expenses for, the honorary recognition of USG civilian employees whose suggestions,
inventions, superior accomplishments, or other personal efforts, including special acts or
services, benefit the NRO, pursuant to section 4503 of title 5, U.S.C., Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) regulations, and DoDI 1400.25.

       (2) Establish a joint military recognition program, pursuant to DoD 1348.33-M.

       (3) As necessary, use advisory committees and employ temporary or intermittent experts
or consultants, as approved by the Secretary of Defense or the DCMO, in support of NRO
functions, in accordance with section 173 of Reference (a); section 3109(b) of title 5, U.S.C.;
Federal Advisory Committee Act, title 5, U.S.C. Appendix 2; and DoDI 5105.04.

       (4) Authorize and approve:

           (a) Temporary duty travel for military personnel assigned or detailed to the NRO,
pursuant to the Joint Travel Regulations.

           (b) Travel for civilian personnel employed by, assigned to, or detailed to the NRO,
pursuant to the Joint Travel Regulations.

           (c) Invitational travel to non-DoD personnel whose consultative, advisory, or other
highly specialized technical services are required in a capacity that is directly related to or in
connection with NRO activities, pursuant to section 5703 of title 5, U.S.C., and the Joint Travel
Regulations.

           (d) Overtime work for civilian personnel employed by, assigned to, or detailed to the
NRO, pursuant to chapter 55, subchapter V of title 5, U.S.C., and applicable OPM regulations,
unless provided by an associated parent element under separate agreement.

           (e) Funds available for travel by military personnel assigned or detailed to the NRO
for expenses incident to attendance at meetings of technical, scientific, professional, or other
                                                16                                 ENCLOSURE 2
Change 1, 10/29/2015
                                                                    DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


similar organizations in such instances when the approval of the Secretary of Defense, or
designee, is required by section 412 of title 37, U.S.C., and sections 4110 and 4111 of title 5,
U.S.C.

       (5) Exercise the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, in accordance with sections
301, 302(b), 3101, and 5107 of title 5, U.S.C., and subchapter I of Chapter 83 of Reference (a),
as amended, and carry out responsibilities regarding the Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel
System as prescribed in DoDD 1400.35 for the employment, direction, and general
administration of NRO civilian personnel.

        (6) Fix rates of pay for wage-rate employees exempted from the Classification Act of
1949 according to section 5102 of title 5, U.S.C., on the basis of rates established under the
Federal Wage System. In fixing such rates, the Director, NRO, will follow the wage schedule
established by the DoD Wage Fixing Authority.

       (7) Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense under section 1609 of
Reference (a), terminate the employment of NRO employees. This authority may not be further
delegated.

        (8) Administer oaths of office to those entering the Executive Branch of the Federal
Government or any other oath required by law in connection with employment therein, pursuant
to section 2903 of title 5. U.S.C., and designate in writing, as may be necessary, officers and
employees of NRO to perform this function.

       (9) Act as agent for the collection and payment of employment taxes imposed by
appropriate statutes.

   b. Personnel Security

        (1) Establish, direct, and administer all aspects of the NRO’s Sensitive Compartmented
Information (SCI) security programs, to include all necessary coordination and implementation
of DNI security policy, consistent with applicable authorities as heads of elements of the
Intelligence Community in accordance with Reference (c) and DoDI 5200.01.

       (2) Pursuant to E.O.s 10450, 12958, 12968, 13467 and applicable DNI policies, as
appropriate, determine eligibility of NRO civilian employees and NRO-sponsored contractors
and consultants for access to SCI and grant, suspend, deny, or revoke security clearances for
these personnel in accordance with ICD 704 and other appropriate DNI guidance, DoDI 5200.02,
DoD 5200.2-R, and DoDD 5220.6.

       (3) Adhere to the personnel security policies and procedures in this section and
elsewhere in this Directive regarding all contractor personnel supporting contracts under the
cognizance of the DNRO and supporting NRO operations, activities, and programs, consistent
with the National Industrial Security Program.

         (4) Collaborate with the applicable parent element, as necessary, regarding SCI access
eligibility for all persons detailed or assigned to the NRO. Parent elements are responsible for
                                                 17                                ENCLOSURE 2
Change 1, 10/29/2015
                                                                   DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


these eligibility and access determinations, pursuant to Reference (c) and ICD 704. The DNRO
remains responsible for determining access to NRO information.
        (5) Collaborate and partner with the parent elements of personnel detailed or assigned to
NRO, using separate agreements, as needed, regarding parent element personnel security policies
and authorities as they affect the NRO. Such agreements will stipulate the personnel security
requirements for assignment or detail to the NRO, and conditions under which NRO can deny or
revoke such assignments or details.

       (6) Administer the provisions of Public Law 95-521 and the Joint Ethics Regulation as
the Designated Agency Ethics Official responsible for the implementation and administration of
the NRO’s ethics program.

   c. Physical Security

        (1) Promulgate the necessary security policies for the physical protection of property and
places under the jurisdiction of the DNRO, including those in industry wherein NRO SCI
resides, pursuant to Reference (c), DoDI 5200.08, and applicable DNI guidance. Promulgate
regulations governing the granting or denial of industrial clearances for access to sensitive
information and regulate physical security in industry or NRO-sponsored contracts for sensitive
materials.

       (2) Protect the security of NRO installations, activities, property, information, and
personnel by appropriate means, including the publication of necessary security regulations.

        (3) Establish, direct, and administer all aspects of the NRO security program for the
protection of SCI, including all necessary coordination and implementation of DNI security
policy, pursuant to References (c) and (i), DCID 6/1, and E.O. 13526.

   d. Information Security

        (1) Establish, direct, and administer an information security program that incorporates
requirements of applicable DNI policy for protection of SCI, and Reference (il) for protection of
collateral classified information.

       (2) Coordinate with the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on
matters relating to the DoD security oversight program, and security program implementation.

   e. Counterintelligence (CI)

        (1) Maintain an organic CI capability to identify vulnerabilities, recommend
countermeasures, and resolve other CI matters to counter the foreign intelligence and
international terrorist threat to NRO operations.

       (2) Conduct authorized DoD polygraph and credibility assessment examinations in
accordance with DoDD 5210.48.



                                                18                               ENCLOSURE 2
Change 1, 10/29/2015
                                                                    DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


       (3) Conduct authorized DoD technical surveillance countermeasures activities in
accordance with DoDI 5240.05.

   f. Records

        (1) Maintain an official seal and attest to the authenticity of official NRO records under
that seal.

      (2) Develop, establish, and maintain an active and continuing Records Management
Program, pursuant to section 3102 of title 44, U.S.C., and DoDD 5015.2.

   g. Publications

      (1) Authorize the publication of advertisements, notices, or proposals in newspapers,
magazines, or other public media, as required, for the effective administration and operation of
the NRO, pursuant to section 3702 of title 44, U.S.C.

        (2) Establish and maintain, for the functions assigned, an appropriate publications system
for common supply and service regulations, instructions, and reference documents, and changes
thereto, pursuant to DoDI 5025.01.

   h. Acquisition/Procurement, Financial Management, and Property

       (1) Comply with DoD and IC directives and agreements concerning acquisition,
including References (d), (t), and (u).

        (2) Enter into support and service agreements with the Military Departments, other DoD
Components, and other USG departments and agencies and parent elements, as required, for the
effective performance of NRO responsibilities and functions.

        (3) Enter into and administer contracts, directly or through a Military Department, DoD
contract administration services component, or other USG department or agency, as appropriate,
for supplies, equipment, and services required to accomplish the NRO mission. To the extent
that any law or E.O. specifically limits such authority to persons at the Secretarial level of a
Military Department, such authority shall be exercised by the appropriate Under Secretary of
Defense.

       (4) Use the Government-wide commercial purchase card for making appropriate
purchases of material and services, other than personal services, for the NRO when it is
determined to be more advantageous and consistent with the best interests of the Government.

       (5) Lease non-excess property under NRO control, under terms that will promote the
National Defense or that will be in the public interest, pursuant to section 2667a of Reference (a).

       (6) Enter into personal-services contracts to the extent permitted by law.



                                                19                                  ENCLOSURE 2
Change 1, 10/29/2015
                                                                  DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


        (7) Approve premium-class travel, when required, for the successful performance of an
intelligence mission.

       (8) Exercise the authority delegated to the Secretary of Defense by the Administrator of
the General Services Administration on the disposal of surplus personal property for
responsibilities assigned herein.

       (9) Establish and maintain appropriate property accounts for the NRO, appoint Boards of
Survey, approve reports of survey, relieve personal liability, and drop accountability for NRO
property contained in the authorized property accounts that has been lost, damaged, stolen,
destroyed, or otherwise rendered unserviceable, pursuant to applicable laws and regulations.

       (10) Accept gifts and contributions of money, property, or services for DoD programs in
support of the accomplishments of NRO missions, pursuant to section 2608 of Reference (a).

  i. Training. Establish and administer training programs as prescribed in Volume 410 of
DoDI 1400.25.

    j. Re-Delegation. The DNRO may re-delegate these authorities, as appropriate and in
writing, except as otherwise restricted in this enclosure or by law or regulation.




                                               20                               ENCLOSURE 2
Change 1, 10/29/2015
                                                                    DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


                                         GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ADNI/AT&F              Assistant DNI for Acquisition, Technology, and Facilities

CDRUSSTRATCOM Commander, United States Strategic Command
CI            counterintelligence
CIA           Central Intelligence Agency


DCID                   Director of Central Intelligence Directive
DCMO                   Deputy Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense
DDI                    Director of Defense Intelligence
DIA                    Defense Intelligence Agency
DIRNSA/CHCSS           Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
DoD SIOO               Department of Defense Senior Intelligence Oversight Official
DoDD                   DoD Directive
DoDI                   DoD Instruction
DoDM                   DoD Manual
DNI                    Director of National Intelligence
DNRO                   Director, National Reconnaissance Office
DSC                    Defense Space Council


EA                     Executive Agent
E.O.                   Executive Order


GC DoD                 General Counsel of the DoD
GEOINT                 Geospatial Intelligence


IC                     Intelligence Community
ICD                    Intelligence Community Directive
IG DoD                 Inspector General of the Department of Defense
IG NRO                 Inspector General of the National Reconnaissance Office


JROC                   Joint Requirements Oversight Council


                                              21                                   GLOSSARY
Change 1, 10/29/2015
                                                                    DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


MDA                     milestone decision authority
MIP                     Military Intelligence Program
MoA                     memorandum of agreement


NGA                     National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
NIP                     National Intelligence Program
NRO                     National Reconnaissance Office
NRP                     National Reconnaissance Program
NSA                     National Security Agency
NSS                     National Security Space


ODNI                    Office of the DNI
OGAs                    other government agencies
OPM                     Office of Personnel Management
OUSD(C)/CFO             Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial
                        Officer, Department of Defense


R&D                     research and development


SCI                     Sensitive Compartmented Information
SCEO                    Special Communications Enterprise Office


U.S.C.                  United States Code
USD(AT&L)               Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(C)/CFO              Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                        Department of Defense
USD(I)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)                  Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USG                     United States Government


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive:

Defense Intelligence Components. Refers to all DoD organizations that perform National
Intelligence, Defense Intelligence, and intelligence-related functions, including the DIA, the
NGA, the NRO, the National Security Agency/Central Security Service, and the intelligence

                                                22                                    GLOSSARY
Change 1, 10/29/2015
                                                                     DoDD 5105.23, June 28, 2011


elements of the Active and Reserve Components of the Military Departments, including the
United States Coast Guard when operating as a service in the Department of the Navy.

Functional Manager. Pursuant to Reference (c), Functional Managers shall report to the DNI
concerning the extent of their duties as Functional Managers, and may be charged with
developing and implementing strategic guidance, policies, and procedures for activities related to
a specific intelligence discipline or set of intelligence activities; setting training and tradecraft
standards; and ensuring coordination within and across intelligence disciplines and IC elements
and with related non-intelligence activities. Functional Managers may also advise on resource
management; policies and procedures; collection capabilities and gaps; intelligence processing
and dissemination; technical architectures; and other issues or activities, as applicable.

IC. A collective term meaning the USG departments and agencies involved with intelligence
and intelligence-related matters and that are designated as part of this group in References (b)
and (c).

National Intelligence. Refers to all intelligence regardless of the source from which derived and
including information gathered within or outside the United States that pertains, as determined
consistent with any guidance issued by the President, to more than one USG agency, and that
involves threats to the United States, its people, property, or interests; the development,
proliferation or use of weapons of mass destruction, or any other matter bearing on United States
national or homeland security (Reference (r)).

NRO MIP. The NRO portion of the MIP.

NRO NIP. The NRO portion of the NIP.

NRP. The activities and all associated resources of the NRO, including its most recently
approved budget, used to support its mission and further its strategic goals -- all under the
authority, direction, and control of the DNRO.

NSS. The space-related systems, services, capabilities, and associated information systems and
networks of the DoD and the National Intelligence community that support U.S. national security
and enable defense and intelligence operations during times of peace, crisis, or conflict. The
Secretary of Defense may designate other space-related systems as National Security Space
systems in coordination with the system owner.

overhead reconnaissance. Activities carried out by space-based capabilities whose principal
purpose is conducting and/or enabling intelligence collection. These activities are comprised of
associated R&D, acquisition, test and evaluation, and system operations performed on or by
satellites, communications, and facilities for data processing as well as command and control of
spacecraft and payloads.

parent element. A DoD Component or OGA that provides personnel to work at the NRO, as
mutually agreed between the DNRO and the Head of the applicable DoD Component or OGA.



                                                 23                                    GLOSSARY
Change 1, 10/29/2015
