                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                               NUMBER 6465.01
                                                                                  July 17, 2015

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Erythrocyte Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency (G6PD) and Sickle
              Cell Trait Screening Programs

REFERENCES: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Instruction 6465.1 (Reference (a)) in accordance with the authority in DoD
Directive 5124.02 (Reference (b)) to establish policy, assign responsibilities, and provide
procedures for G6PD and sickle cell trait screening, in accordance with sections 1074a and
10206 of Title 10, United States Code (Reference (c)) and DoD Directive 6200.04 (Reference
(d)).

    b. Establishes screening requirements for the presence of G6PD deficiency in all personnel
entering the Military Services and those Service members on active duty who have not
previously been tested.

   c. Establishes screening requirements for sickle cell trait following established clinical and
preventive medicine recommendations for the Military Services’ operational requirements.


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department
of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
within the DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. All personnel entering the Military Services will be screened for G6PD deficiency.

   b. Sickle cell trait screening will be done according to Service-specific operational
requirements.
                                                               DoDI 6465.01, July 17, 2015


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES: See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective July 17, 2015.




Enclosure
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




                                             2
                                                                  DoDI 6465.01, July 17, 2015


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES

(a)   DoD Instruction 6465.1, “Hemoglobin S and Erythrocyte Glucose-6-Phosphate
      Dehydrogenase Deficiency Testing Program,” July 29, 1981 (hereby cancelled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c)   Title 10, United States Code
(d)   DoD Directive 6200.04, “Force Health Protection (FHP),” October 9, 2004, as amended
(e)   DoD Instruction 8320.02, “Sharing Data, Information, and Information Technology (IT)
      Services in the Department of Defense,” August 5, 2013
(f)   DoD Directive 5400.11, “DoD Privacy Program,” October 29, 2014
(g)   DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(h)   DoD 6025.18-R, “DoD Health Information Privacy Regulation,” January 24, 2003
(i)   DoD Instruction 6130.03, “Medical Standards for Appointment, Enlistment, or Induction in
      the Military Services,” April 28, 2010, as amended
(j)   DoD Instruction 6040.45, “Service Treatment Record (STR) and Non-Service Treatment
      Record (NSTR) Life Cycle Management,” October 28, 2010




                                           3                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 6465.01, July 17, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS. Under the authority,
direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs:

   a. Oversees the development and implementation of the G6PD and sickle cell trait screening
programs.

    b. Recommends changes or revisions to policy and issues Military Health System guidance,
as necessary, to implement this instruction.

   c. Establishes performance measures and goals, provides guidance for the development of
metrics, and monitors metrics implementation and analysis.

    d. Requires appropriate information sharing, except where limited by law, policy, or security
classification. Data produced as a result of the assigned responsibilities must be visible,
accessible, and understandable to the rest of the DoD, as appropriate, in accordance with DoD
Directive 8320.02 (Reference (e)), DoD Directive 5400.11 (Reference (f)), DoD 5400.11-R
(Reference (g)), and DoD 6025.18-R (Reference (h)).

    e. Ensure that the policies and procedures of this instruction are implemented to protect the
privacy of individuals in the collection, use, maintenance, and distribution of personally
identifiable information, as required by References (f) and (g).


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY. Under the authority, direction, and control of
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, the Director, Defense Health Agency:

    a. Establishes implementation procedures in a Defense Health Agency procedural
instruction.

   b. Monitors the implementation of this instruction.

    c. Establishes quality assurance and quality control parameters for the uniform
implementation of the G6PD screening program, and defines follow-on education activities for
those with G6PD deficiency.

    d. Establishes minimum requirements and criteria for the development of Service-specific
requirements during the implementation of the sickle cell trait screening program, and defines
follow-on education activities for those with sickle cell trait.




                                            4                                     ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 6465.01, July 17, 2015


    e. Establishes quality assurance and quality control parameters for defined inclusion criteria
in the implementation of a sickle cell trait screening program by the Military Services.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND COMMANDANT OF THE
U.S. COAST GUARD. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Commandant of the
U.S. Coast Guard:

   a. Develop and implement a comprehensive plan to screen for G6PD deficiency.

       (1) Ensure all Service members are screened upon entry for G6PD deficiency and
assessed to determine whether the condition found during the testing is consistent with
continuation of military service, in accordance with DoD Instruction 6130.03 (Reference (i)).

       (2) Develop medical education programs for all Service members identified during the
screening for G6PD deficiency and ensure the programs include the nature of the condition with
associated risk factors and activities in all areas, including operational, occupational,
environmental, and recreational.

      (3) Ensure Service members identified to have G6PD deficiency participate in selected
medical education programs.

      (4) Ensure medical personnel are trained in the administration of a comprehensive
medical education program on G6PD deficiency.

   b. Develop and implement a comprehensive plan to screen for sickle cell trait.

       (1) Define case definition criteria, special situations and populations, operational
requirements, and clinical indications in the sickle cell trait screening plan.

       (2) Develop medical education programs for all Service members identified during the
screening for sickle cell trait.

       (3) Ensure the medical education program includes the nature of the condition with
associated risk factors and activities in all areas including operational, occupational,
environmental, and recreational, as well as the genetic implications.

        (4) Include mitigation strategies and self-awareness assessments along with Service-
specific restrictions and requirements in the education programs.

   c. Provide the necessary resources to support these programs.




                                             5                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 6465.01, July 17, 2015



                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. G6PD SCREENING PROCESS

    a. All personnel entering or on active duty in the Military Services will be screened for the
presence of G6PD deficiency and results will be documented in their electronic health record
(EHR) and in the Service Treatment Record when the EHR is not accessible in accordance with
DoD Instruction 6040.45 (Reference (j)).

   b. Personnel who already have been screened do not need to be retested, provided
documentation in the Service member’s EHR and Service Treatment Record is adequate.

    c. Personnel identified as having G6PD deficiency will participate in an educational program
directed by trained medical personnel.

    d. Participation in the educational program for personnel identified as having G6PD
deficiency must be documented in the Service member’s EHR (or Service Treatment Record
when the EHR is not accessible).


2. SICKLE CELL TRAIT SCREENING PROCESS

   a. Sickle cell trait screening will be done only on those Service members who meet
demographic, clinical, or operational criteria as developed by the Military Services.

   b. The results of testing must be documented into the Service member’s EHR (or Service
Treatment Record when the EHR is not accessible).

   c. Personnel identified as having sickle cell traits will participate in an educational program
administered by trained medical personnel, documented in accordance with paragraph 1d of this
enclosure.




                                                 6                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                      DoDI 6465.01, July 17, 2015


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


EHR     electronic health record


G6PD glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

G6PD. A red blood cell enzyme that catalyzes the first step in a metabolic pathway that serves
as precursor for important molecules. The red blood cell is particularly dependent on G6PD for
protection against oxidative stress because, unlike other cells in the body, red blood cells lack a
nucleus, mitochondria, and other organelles necessary to produce the proteins involved in
alternate pathways that can generate nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, responsible
for cellular respiratory, oxidative, burst. Red blood cells deficient in G6PD are therefore
susceptible to oxidation and hemolysis under conditions of oxidative stress.

G6PD deficiency. The most prevalent human enzyme deficiency in the world, the disorder stems
from an intrinsic metabolic defect of the red blood cells. The majority of people with G6PD
deficiency are unaware of their status, living out their lives with no anemia, no symptoms, and
no complications. The disorder becomes recognized when an episode of acute hemolysis
(rupture of the red blood cell) is triggered by exposure to oxidant drugs, infection, or ingestion of
fava beans.

personally identifiable information. Information that can be used to distinguish or trace an
individual’s identity, such as their name, social security number, date and place of birth,
mother’s maiden name, biometric records, including any other personal information that is linked
or linkable to a specified individual.

screening. A method of surveillance used in a population to identify an unrecognized disease in
individuals without signs or symptoms.

sickle cell trait. All conditions in which an individual carries the sickle hemoglobin gene
mutation on only one beta globin gene. If the other beta globin gene is normal, the individual
has sickle cell trait, which is not a disease and does not alter the individual’s life expectancy.
Individual knowledge of carrier status is important for family planning to assist in the prevention
of new cases of sickle cell disease. Sickle cell trait is generally a benign carrier condition,
usually with none of the symptoms of sickle cell anemia. In rare instances some individuals with
sickle cell trait, when subjected to the extremes of exertion, in particular when compounded by
the environmental challenges of altitude or heat, have been shown to possess an increased


                                           7                                           GLOSSARY
                                                                     DoDI 6465.01, July 17, 2015


relative risk for organ infarct, fulminant exertional rhabdomyolysis, and exertional nontraumatic
sudden death.

sickle cell disease. A hereditary condition, also called sickle cell anemia, that causes a type of
faulty hemoglobin in red blood cells. Some red blood cells can become hard, change shape and
don’t move well through the smallest blood vessels. This can stop or slow blood flow to parts of
the body, causing less oxygen to reach these areas. The sickle cells also die earlier than normal
blood cells, which can cause a shortage of red blood cells in the body. For most people, there is
no cure for sickle cell disease.




                                          8                                          GLOSSARY
