                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                          NUMBER 4705.01E
                                                                                   June 3, 2015
                                                        Incorporating Change 3, January 2, 2020

                                                                                     USD(A&S)

SUBJECT: Management of Land-Based Water Resources in Support of Contingency Operations

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive 4705.1 (Reference (a)) to establish policy, assign responsibilities,
and prescribe procedures for management of land-based water resources in support of
contingency operations to ensure inter-Service compatibility and interoperability of water
support equipment.

  b. Designates the Secretary of the Army as the DoD Executive Agent (EA) for Land-Based
Water Resources in accordance with DoD Directive 5101.1 (Reference (b)).

    c. Designates the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment (USD(A&S))
as the OSD focal point for land-based water resources.


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive:

   a. Applies to:

        (1) OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD
Components”).

        (2) All aspects of land-based water support for the Military Services during contingency
operations, including water selection, pumping, purification, storage, distribution, cooling,
consumption, water reuse, water source intelligence, research and development, acquisition of
water support equipment, water support operations doctrine, human factors requirements,
training, and water support force structure.
                                                                   DoDD 4705.01E, June 3, 2015


   b. Does not apply to:

        (1) The policy, procedures, design, construction, quality standards, or other matters
related to peacekeeping water supply activities.

       (2) Shipboard water systems designed for internal use.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that water resources will be established to support contingency
operations and permit successful deployment and employment of forces.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This change is administrative and updates references and
organizational symbols to reflect the reorganization of the Office of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, pursuant to the July 13, 2018 Deputy
Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (c)).

7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective June 3, 2015.




                                                 Robert O. Work
                                                 Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. JWRMAG Charter
Glossary




Change 3, 01/02/2020                            2
                                                              DoDD 4705.01E, June 3, 2015


                                     ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 4705.1, “Management of Land-Based Water Resources in Support of
    Contingency Operations,” July 9, 1992 (hereby cancelled)
(b) DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(c) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
    of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(d) DoD Directive 3000.10, “Contingency Basing Outside the United States,” January 10, 2013
(e) Joint Publication 5-0, “Joint Operation Planning,” August 11, 2011
(f) Joint Publication 3-07.3, “Peace Operations,” August 1, 2012




Change 3, 01/02/2020                         3                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDD 4705.01E, June 3, 2015


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(A&S). The USD(A&S) establishes DoD policy on all land-based water resource
matters.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SUSTAINMENT (ASD(S)). Under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(A&S), the ASD(S):

   a. Oversees the activities of the DoD EA for Land-Based Water Resources in accordance
with Reference (b) and DoD Directive 3000.10 (Reference (d)).

    b. Provides overall guidance and direction for land-based water resource matters through the
Joint Water Resources Management Action Group (JWRMAG), as specified in Enclosure 3 of
this directive.

   c. Every 3 years, assesses the responsibilities of the DoD EA for Land-Based Water
Resources for continued need, currency, and effectiveness, in accordance with Reference (b).

   d. Coordinates with the DoD EA for Land-Based Water Resources to ensure:

      (1) All necessary actions are taken and funding is obtained to keep land-based water
resources aligned with the development of operational plans and force structure changes.

       (2) Development of logistics plans for land-based water resources to support contingency
operations in all environments, to include the water needs of all DoD and other U.S. Government
departments and agencies, host nations, allied forces, non-governmental organizations, and
intergovernmental organizations to achieve unity of effort to support operational requirements.

    e. Develops DoD-wide policy for master planning policy, facilities and construction
standards, and real property accountability policy for land-based water resources requirements in
accordance with Reference (d).

   f. Reviews, analyzes, and makes recommendations on land-based water resources
requirements to the JWRMAG.


3. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

   a. Develop, program, and budget for water resource materiel, including research and
development, in support of the Combatant Commanders’ operational plans in accordance with
Reference (d).




Change 3, 01/02/2020                            4                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 4705.01E, June 3, 2015


   b. Provide the DoD EA for Land-Based Water Resources with information on land-based
water resources.

   c. Develop and distribute water resource employment and support plans and procedures.

   d. Provide membership to the JWRMAG, as specified in Enclosure 3 of this directive.


4. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY. In his or her capacity as the DoD EA for Land-Based Water
Resources in support of contingency operations, and in addition to the responsibilities in section
4 of this enclosure, the Secretary of the Army:

   a. In coordination with the other DoD Component heads, develops and implements plans,
procedures, and requirements for water resources in support of land-based forces.

   b. Advises the ASD(S) of significant developments on water resource research, equipment
acquisition, and doctrine.

   c. Ensures contingency basing requirements are integrated into land-based water resource
employment, support plans, and procedures in accordance with Reference (d).

    d. Establishes procedures for coordination of DoD Component regulatory documents and
plans affecting water resources.

    e. Ensures the JWRMAG develops and maintains an improved, expanded, and automated
water resources intelligence database for the rapid retrieval of information on an area or point
basis to assist the Combatant Commanders in making water support logistics decisions.

  f. Provides data on the location, quantity, and quality of land-based water resources to the
DoD Components.

   g. Designates a chair for the JWRMAG.

   h. Administers the management of land-based water resources through the JWRMAG, as
specified in Enclosure 3 of this directive.


5. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. In addition to the responsibilities in
section 4 of this enclosure, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

   a. Provides guidance to DoD Components on water resource support requirements for
operation plans in accordance with Reference (d).

    b. Ensures that the Combatant Commanders review operational plans to assess the adequacy
of water resource support for deployed forces.




Change 3, 01/02/2020                             5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 4705.01E, June 3, 2015


   c. In coordination with the appropriate DoD Component heads, develops doctrine and water
consumption planning factors for the employment of water resources.

   d. Assesses that programmed resources support validated requirements.


6. COMBATANT COMMANDERS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this
enclosure, the Combatant Commanders provide prioritized force materiel requirements for water
support and other requested management data to the DoD EA for Land-Based Water Resources
in accordance with Reference (d).




Change 3, 01/02/2020                          6                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 4705.01E, June 3, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                      JWRMAG CHARTER


1. PURPOSE. This charter establishes the JWRMAG to coordinate, advise, and recommend
solutions to resolve land-based water support issues.


2. ORGANIZATION AND MEMBERSHIP

    a. The Secretary of the Army designates a representative to chair the JWRMAG pursuant to
paragraph 5g of Enclosure 2 of this directive.

    b. Each DoD Component will provide a representative to the JWRMAG. The Inspector
General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD) may provide an observer to the JWRMAG, if
the IG DoD determines that it is appropriate.


3. FUNCTIONS. The JWRMAG will:

   a. Determine effects of water resources and related decisions on contingency support
functions.

    b. Develop water support technology research and development and equipment acquisition
plans to support operations in all environments.

    c. Develop an improved, expanded, and automated water resources intelligence database for
the rapid retrieval of selected data.

    d. Assess the water needs of all DoD and non-DoD organizations that affect the availability
of water resources to support contingency operational requirements.

   e. Find solutions to problems presented to the group.

   f. Recommend policy changes to the ASD(S), as necessary.

    g. Provide liaison support to host nations, allied forces, and others, to resolve water concerns
related to contingency operations.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

   a. The JWRMAG Chair will:

       (1) Ensure the accomplishment of the group objectives and discharge of its
responsibilities.

Change 3, 01/02/2020                             7                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDD 4705.01E, June 3, 2015



       (2) Convene the group as required, but at least annually, to resolve problems.

       (3) Submit minutes of each group meeting to the ASD(S) and group representatives.

       (4) Submit policy recommendations to the ASD(S).

       (5) Maintain a current list of JWRMAG representatives.

       (6) Present problems to the group for resolution.

      (7) Support contingency operations by ensuring water support equipment is interoperable
and compatible across the DoD Components.

       (8) Coordinate and resolve water support issues.

       (9) Ensure Combatant Command requirements are identified.

        (10) Ensure that necessary actions are taken and funding obtained to certify that water
support equipment acquisitions keep pace with the development of operational plans and force
structure, in accordance with the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution process.

       (11) Resolve inter-Service problems through direct coordination among group members.

   b. JWRMAG members will:

       (1) Attend all group meetings or ensure alternate DoD Component representation is
provided.

       (2) Provide the Chair a copy of items of interest for the group.

       (3) Respond to taskings emanating from group meetings.

      (4) Present the DoD Component position and be authorized to negotiate and seek
agreement with JWRMAG members to achieve the goals and objectives of the DoD for
management of land-based water.

       (5) Provide information regarding the DoD Component’s program and budget for water
resource materiel, including research and development.

       (6) Provide information on land-based water resources, water resource employment,
support plans, and procedures.


5. ADMINISTRATION. Sponsors of JWRMAG members will fund necessary travel and
administrative costs associated with group functions.



Change 3, 01/02/2020                            8                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDD 4705.01E, June 3, 2015


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


  ASD(S)            Assistant Secretary of Defense for Sustainment

  ASD(EI&E)         Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations, and
                    Environment

  EA                Executive Agent

  IG DoD            Inspector General of the Department of Defense

  JWRMAG            Joint Water Resources Management Action Group

  USD(A&S)          Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

contingency. Defined in Joint Publication 5-0 (Reference (e)).

land-based water resources. Resources used to provide water support to Military Services on
land, including, but not limited to, equipment, funding, and force structure during contingency
operations.

peacekeeping. Defined in Joint Publication 3-07.3 (Reference (f)).




Change 3, 01/02/2020                             9                                     GLOSSARY
