                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 6025.22
                                                                                January 30, 2015

                                                                                      USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     Assistive Technology (AT) for Wounded, Ill, and Injured Service Members

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02 (Reference
(a)), and section 561 of Public Law 109-364 (Reference (b)), similar to sections 794d and 3002
of Title 29, United States Code (Reference (c)), and in accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI)
1300.24 (Reference (d)), this instruction reissues DoDI 6025.22 (Reference (e)) to:

    a. Establish policy, define terms, assign responsibilities, and provide procedures for
establishing AT programs in coordination with the Military Health System (MHS) and the
Recovery Coordination Program.

    b. Provide support for an interdependent AT system between the DoD Human Resources
Activity’s (DoDHRA) Computer/Electronic Accommodations Program (CAP), the MHS, and
the wounded warrior programs. The AT system will provide specific guidance to military
treatment facilities (MTFs) and transition units to improve the delivery and quality of
rehabilitative services to wounded, ill, and injured Service members in the active duty, Reserve,
and National Guard components.


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department
of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
within DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Strategies for utilizing AT during rehabilitation must be aligned with generally accepted
standards for health promotion and maximum functional outcomes.
                                                              DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015


    b. MTFs and wounded warrior programs must incorporate AT into rehabilitative services
programs as part of an organization-wide, interdisciplinary adoption of computer and
telecommunication accessibility practices.

    c. MTFs and wounded warrior programs must provide and assess AT services, as required,
for wounded, ill, and injured Service members or Service members who are:

       (1) Enrolled in their respective wounded warrior program; or

        (2) Referred to the Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES) and participating in
the Education and Employment Initiative (E2I) and Operation WARFIGHTER (OWF) programs
for federal employment opportunities, in accordance with DoDI 1300.25 (Reference (f)).


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective January 30, 2015.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




                                               2
                                                             DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(b)   Section 561 of Public Law 109-364, “John Warner National Defense Authorization Act for
      Fiscal Year 2007,” October 17, 2006
(c)   Title 29, United States Code
(d)   DoD Instruction 1300.24, “Recovery Coordination Program (RCP),” December 1, 2009
(e)   DoD Instruction 6025.22, “Assistive Technology (AT) for Wounded Service Members,”
      September 9, 2008 (hereby cancelled)
(f)   DoD Instruction 1300.25, “Guidance for the Education and Employment Initiative (E2I)
      and Operation WARFIGHTER (OWF),” March 25, 2013
(g)   DoD Directive 5400.11, “DoD Privacy Program” October 29, 2014
(h)   DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program” May 14, 2007
(i)   Joint Publication 1-02, “Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated
      Terms,” current edition




                                              3                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R):

    a. Serves as the Secretary of Defense’s principal advisor on the DoD interdependent AT
system to improve the delivery and quality of rehabilitative, recovery and transition services for
wounded, ill, and injured Service members.

   b. Monitors compliance with this instruction.


2. DIRECTOR, DoDHRA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), the
Director, DoDHRA:

   a. Establishes organizational priorities for AT programs in coordination with the MHS and
wounded warrior programs.

   b. Oversees implementation of the CAP.

    c. Confirms that CAP policy is established and monitored in accordance with References (a)
and (b) and that CAP activities meet all applicable acquisition, confidentiality, privacy, security,
and disclosure requirements in accordance with DoDD 5400.11 and DoD 5400.11-R (References
(g) and (h)).

   d. Establishes a standardized methodology for implementing the CAP AT process at MTFs
and wounded warrior programs to increase awareness and impact of AT programs across the
MHS and throughout the wounded warrior programs.


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)). Under
the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), the ASD(HA):

   a. Establishes organizational priorities for AT programs within the MHS.

    b. Confirms that AT policy is established and monitored in accordance with References (a)
and (b) and that AT activities meet all applicable confidentiality, privacy, security, and
disclosure requirements in accordance with References (g) and (h).

    c. Establishes a standardized methodology for implementing the CAP AT process at MTFs
to increase awareness and impact of AT programs across the MHS.

   d. Incorporates the CAP process in healthcare promotion, programs, and procedures.



                                                 4                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015




4. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR WARRIOR CARE POLICY
(DASD(WCP)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the ASD(HA), the DASD(WCP):

   a. Synchronizes all programs and processes throughout the DoD that support E2I and OWF,
including those provided by the Military Departments and U.S. Special Operations Command
(USSOCOM). Recommends changes to policy and operational procedures to the USD(P&R), as
necessary.

    b. Coordinates the consultation and collaboration with other federal entities to maximize
wounded, ill, and injured, and IDES-enrolled Service members access to all available support
services and resources.

    c. Engages with private-sector entities, to the extent authorized by law and DoD regulations,
to facilitate the formation of partnerships to enhance employment opportunities.


5. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY (DHA). Under the authority, direction, and
control of the ASD(HA), the Director, DHA ensures that MTFs in the National Capital Region
implement actions applicable to MTFs under this instruction.


6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

   a. Comply with the policies and procedures prescribed in this instruction.

   b. Provide implementing guidance and oversee implementation of AT policies and
procedures.

   c. Recommend policy changes to this instruction, as necessary, to the USD(P&R).


7. SURGEONS GENERAL OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. Under the authority,
direction, and control of the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the Surgeons General of the
Military Departments:

    a. Establish comprehensive CAP and AT programs within MTFs serving wounded, ill, and
injured Service members, and implement a system for ongoing evaluation of such programs,
including cost of AT, type of AT, medical diagnosis and prognosis.

   b. Disseminate CAP policy and procedures to MTFs.




                                                5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015


   c. Support CAP and AT programs within the continuum of care, such as DoD Component
wounded warrior programs, community-based healthcare organizations, the Veterans
Administration Polytrauma Rehabilitation Centers, and other similar programs.

    d. Require that MTF commanders designate an individual (e.g., CAP representative) with a
relevant clinical background to establish and oversee program activities promoting a targeted,
coordinated AT plan for improving access and care for patients, recovering warriors and, when
applicable, employees.




                                               6                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. CAP. The CAP:

   a. Conducts needs assessments; procures and delivers AT to the MTF or wounded warrior
program location at no cost to the MTF or wounded warrior program; and provides training
support services to confirm integration and use of AT for wounded, ill, and injured Service
members in collaboration with MTFs and the wounded warrior programs,.

    b. Provides AT and information or communication technology to MTFs and wounded
warrior programs, as requested and appropriate, to enable onsite assessments, improved
integration of AT into rehabilitation services, and onsite inventory.

    c. Provides in-service training on CAP and the AT program to MTFs and wounded warrior
programs. Provides training for new CAP representatives, including an overview of AT, needs
assessments, request procedures, inventory management, and other ongoing support services.
Also provides annual refresher training for key partners via online training, video teleconference,
or webinars.

   d. Publishes and maintains a CAP wounded, ill, and injured Service members guide
(www.cap.mil/Documents/CAP_WSM_Handbook.pdf) to support the implementation of AT
programs at MTFs and wounded warrior programs.

    e. Provides access to ongoing support to Service members following receipt of an AT device
until separation from active duty service, at which time the AT device becomes the property of
an eligible Service member under Reference (b) and AT and rehabilitative services provided for
personal use become the responsibility of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

   f. Distributes a report to MTF commanders and wounded warrior program leaders annually.
The report will describe accommodation and AT activities, including cost savings achieved by
MTFs and wounded warrior programs as a result of collaboration with CAP.


2. MTF. In collaboration with CAP, MTFs will:

    a. Incorporate CAP into rehabilitative services programs that include AT as part of the
recovery and rehabilitation process.

    b. Establish an AT plan. MTFs must develop a coordinated plan for ensuring that eligible
Service members have access to AT services and equipment as part of existing rehabilitative
services programs. The AT plans must incorporate the CAP partnership, integration of AT as
part of recovery and rehabilitation, the introduction of re-employment through the utilization of




                                                 7                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015


AT after injury or illness, and onsite inventory management procedures. The AT plans must be
shared with the CAP Office at CAP@mail.mil.

    c. Designate a CAP representative to be the MTF lead and point of contact for the CAP
partnership by completing DD Form 2988, “CAP Partnership Representative Form.” MTFs must
identify an appropriate individual with a relevant clinical background to the CAP office to serve
as a CAP representative. CAP representatives may include medical or rehabilitation
professionals or case managers. The CAP representative will coordinate AT needs assessments,
onsite inventory when applicable, and CAP-related services to guarantee eligible Service
members receive appropriate accommodation solutions.

    d. Integrate AT service provision and utilization within the integrated rehabilitation care plan
using the Electronic Medical Record System. To better understand the impact of rehabilitation
services, MTFs, working with CAP and the wounded warrior programs, must conduct annual
reviews of activities, including measuring and reporting the impact of AT on healthcare and
rehabilitation.


3. WOUNDED WARRIOR PROGRAMS. In coordination with CAP, the wounded warrior
programs:

    a. Incorporate CAP into support services that include AT as a part of the Service member’s
transition.

   b. Establish an AT plan. Military Department and USSOCOM wounded warrior programs
must develop a coordinated plan in coordination with the responsible MTF representative, if
applicable, and with the MTF CAP representative for ensuring that eligible Service members
have access to AT services as part of existing rehabilitative services programs. The AT plans
must be shared with the CAP Office at CAP.WSM@mail.mil.

    c. Designate a CAP representative. Military Department and USSOCOM wounded warrior
programs must identify to the CAP office an appropriate individual to serve as a CAP
representative by completing DD Form 2988. The CAP representative, a case manager, or
another individual who provides support to wounded, ill and injured Service members, will
coordinate AT needs assessments and related CAP services to confirm eligible Service members
receive appropriate accommodation solutions.


4. COMMON PROCEDURES. In coordination with CAP, the MTFs and wounded warrior
programs:

    a. Identify when CAP staff members are required to assist in the needs assessment process.
The needs assessment process must consider Service members’ limitations, essential and
required functions, and transition goals; as well as technical specifications for computers and
telecommunication systems using DD Form 2989, “Computer Specification Information.”




                                                 8                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015


    b. Submit AT requests to CAP using DD Form 2987, “CAP Accommodation Request.” A
needs assessment summary must also be submitted as part of the justification for accommodation
section of the AT request.

   c. Document in the Service member’s record when he or she receives AT devices or services
from CAP.

    d. Provide independent verification of property receipt back to CAP. In accordance with
Reference (b), the AT is authorized to become the property of the wounded, ill, or injured
Service member at his or her separation from active service. MTFs and wounded warrior
programs must record the transfer of property to the Service member upon separation from active
service, or to his or her next duty station if he or she returns to active service.




                                              9                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ASD(HA)                  Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs
AT                       assistive technology


CAP                      Computer/Electronic Accommodations Program


DASD(WCP)                Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Warrior Care Policy
DHA                      Defense Health Agency
DoDHRA                   Department of Defense Human Resource Agency
DoDD                     DoD directive
DoDI                     DoD instruction


E2I                      Education and Employment Initiative

IDES                     Integrated Disability Evaluation System


MHS                      Military Health System
MTF                      military treatment facility


OWF                      Operation WARFIGHTER


USD(P&R)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USSOCOM                  U.S. Special Operations Command


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.

AT. Technology that provides individuals with disabilities equal access to computer and
telecommunication work environments. It does not include durable medical equipment and is
divided into two categories: devices and services.

AT device. Any item, piece of equipment, or product system, whether acquired commercially,
modified, or customized, that is used to increase, maintain, or improve the functional capabilities
of individuals with disabilities. The devices help individuals access computer and
telecommunication systems and gain improved access to care and decision making. Examples


                                                 10                                   GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDI 6025.22, January 30, 2015


include voice recognition and speech output software, assistive listening devices, and
augmentative or alternative communication devices. A list of available devices can be found at
www.cap.mil/wsm/solutions/index.aspx.

AT service. Any service that directly assists an individual with a disability in the selection,
acquisition, or use of an AT device. Services may include needs assessments, acquisition,
integration, coordination of services with rehabilitation plans, training, and technical assistance.


CAP. A program under the authority of the DoDHRA that provides AT to increase access to
computer and telecommunication systems by employees with disabilities within the DoD and
federal partner agencies, and Service members with cognitive, communication, dexterity,
hearing, or vision impairments.


wounded warrior programs. A system of support and advocacy to guide and assist the wounded,
ill, and injured Service members and family or designated caregiver through treatment,
rehabilitation, return to duty, or military retirement into the civilian community. Each Military
Department has a unique wounded warrior program that addresses its Service members’ needs.
This term and its definition are proposed for inclusion in the next edition of Joint Publication
1-02 (Reference (j)).




                                                 11                                    GLOSSARY
