                             Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 6420.01
                                                                                March 20, 2009
                                            Incorporating Change 3, Effective September 8, 2020

                                                                                      USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:     National Center for Medical Intelligence (NCMI)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive 6420.1 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction in accordance with
the authority in DoD Directive 5143.01 (Reference (b));

   b. Re-establishes the Armed Forces Medical Intelligence Center as the NCMI for the
conduct of medical intelligence within the Department of Defense, pursuant to Executive Order
12333 (Reference (c)); Chapter 44, Section 3001 of Title 50, United States Code, also known as
“The National Security Act of 1947, as amended” (Reference (d)); and DoD Directive 5240.01
(Reference (e)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department
of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”). The
term “Military Departments,” as used herein, refers to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the
Marine Corps, and, as provided above, the Coast Guard (including Active and Reserve
Components).


3. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Instruction, the term “medical intelligence” is
defined as the product of collection, evaluation, and all-source analysis of worldwide health
threats and issues, including foreign medical capabilities, infectious disease, environmental
health risks, developments in biotechnology and biomedical subjects of national and military
importance, and support to force protection.
                                                                  DoDI 6420.01, March 20, 2009



4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. There will be a unified Defense community for medical intelligence activities; those
activities will be executed in a coordinated and coherent manner to effectively respond to U.S.
intelligence priorities in support of national security objectives, and in accordance with all
applicable laws, Presidential directives, DoD issuances, and Director of National Intelligence
(DNI) guidelines.

    b. NCMI is the DoD lead activity for the production of medical intelligence and will prepare
and coordinate integrated, all-source intelligence for the DoD and other government and
international organizations on foreign health threats and other medical issues to protect U.S.
interests worldwide.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and
Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (f)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective March 20, 2009.




                                                 James R. Clapper
                                                 Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence


Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities




Change 3, 09/08/2020                            2
                                                               DoDI 6420.01, March 20, 2009


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 6420.1, “Armed Forces Medical Intelligence Center (AFMIC),”
    October 9, 2004 (hereby canceled)
(b) DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
    (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(c) Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” as amended
(d) Chapter 44, Section 3001 of Title 50, United States Code, also known as “The National
    Security Act of 1947, as amended”
(e) DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(f) Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
    December 20, 2019
(g) DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008




                                              3
Change 3, 09/08/2020                                                         ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDI 6420.01, March 20, 2009


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY
(USD(I&S)). The USD(I&S) shall serve as the Principal Staff Assistant to the Secretary of
Defense and as the primary DoD representative to the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence (ODNI) for medical intelligence issues in accordance with Reference (b).


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). The Director, DIA, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), shall:

   a. Oversee the activities, staffing, and funding of the NCMI, in accordance with DoD
Directive 5105.21 (Reference (g)).

   b. Manage medical intelligence for the Department of Defense and serve as the principal
medical intelligence advisor to the Secretary of Defense; USD(I&S); Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Health Affairs, under the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)); the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Combatant Commanders; and the
DNI, reporting to the Secretary of Defense through the USD(I&S).

    c. Provide medical intelligence support to military operations in accordance with tasking
priorities and standards of timeliness assigned by the Secretary of Defense, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and Combatant Commanders.

    d. Respond to medical intelligence-related requirements in support of DoD Components, to
include planning, operations, requests for technical information, and other support, as required.

    e. Process and disseminate medical intelligence for foreign intelligence and
counterintelligence, in accordance with the objectives, requirements, and priorities established by
the Secretary of Defense and the DNI.

   f. Provide medical intelligence support to National Intelligence Support Plans, as required.

   g. Appoint the Director, NCMI, who shall be a Senior Executive Service member or an
equivalent flag officer with extensive medical and/or intelligence experience.

   h. Supervise NCMI activities pursuant to Reference (g). Manage the NCMI as an integral
element of the DIA, exercise administrative control, and provide appropriate administrative
support.

    i. Coordinate with the Secretaries of the Military Departments on the assignment of military
personnel to NCMI.



                                                4
Change 3, 09/08/2020                                                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 6420.01, March 20, 2009


   j. Coordinate appropriate support of the NCMI by the DoD Components.


3. DIRECTOR, NCMI. The Director, NCMI, under the authority, direction and control of the
Director, DIA, shall:

  a. Serve to advance the collective medical intelligence capabilities of the DoD Intelligence
Community (IC).

   b. Coordinate, as appropriate, integration of IC medical intelligence policies, standards, and
procedures with tactical and operational level DoD procedures.

   c. Promote an integrated IC medical intelligence strategy and implementation consistent
with the National Intelligence Strategy and the National Intelligence Priorities Framework.

   d. Coordinate DoD IC medical intelligence requirements of common concern.

    e. Coordinate the procurement of tools and services to support medical intelligence
activities.

    f. Establish formal agreements with IC and U.S. Government entities, in accordance with
DoD policies and procedures, so that medical information, data, and resources that are vital to
the production of medical intelligence are shared as appropriate.

   g. Review and approve products generated by the NCMI, after appropriate consultation or
coordination with the medical intelligence community.

    h. Ensure NCMI activities are compatible and consistent with IC data standards,
architectures, processes, and procedures; medical intelligence data and products are accessible
and intelligence sources and methods are protected through applicable classification,
compartmentalization, and dissemination controls.

   i. Disseminate analysis on medical intelligence matters consistent with


4. DIRECTORS, NATIONAL GEOSPATIAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (NGA) AND
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (NSA). The Directors of NGA and NSA, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S) shall:

   a. Provide support for medical intelligence and medical intelligence-related requirements.

    b. Provide support to NCMI for medical intelligence or medical intelligence-related
activities and missions of the Department of Defense.




                                                5
Change 3, 09/08/2020                                                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 6420.01, March 20, 2009


    c. Evaluate their own organization’s plans, programs, and activities for adequacy and
responsiveness in support of NCMI’s medical intelligence or medical intelligence-related
activities, and make recommendations for agency’s support to the USD(I&S), as appropriate.


5. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS. The Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), shall support the medical intelligence mission and assist NCMI by coordinating
medical intelligence needs and requirements throughout the DoD medical community.


6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

    a. Plan and program for medical intelligence resources in consonance with fiscal policy and
guidance established by the Secretary of Defense and the USD(I&S) and program guidance
received from the USD(I&S) and the DNI.

   b. Provide military personnel consistent with NCMI mission requirements in accordance
with Reference (g).


7. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:

    a. Support the medical intelligence mission and assist NCMI by coordinating medical
intelligence needs and requirements throughout their areas of responsibility.

  b. Provide to NCMI information and data regarding their areas of responsibility relevant to
NCMI mission requirements in accordance with Reference (g).




                                               6
Change 3, 09/08/2020                                                            ENCLOSURE 2
