                                      Department of Defense
                                        INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 4715.16
                                                                           September 18, 2008
                                             Incorporating Change 2, Effective August 31, 2018

                                                                                     USD(A&S)

SUBJECT: Cultural Resources Management

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction establishes DoD policy and assigns responsibilities under the
authority of DoD Directive (DoDD) 5134.01 (Reference (a)) and in accordance with DoDD
4715.1E (Reference (b)) to comply with applicable Federal statutory and regulatory
requirements, Executive orders (E.O.s), and Presidential memorandums for the integrated
management of cultural resources on DoD-managed lands.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE. This Instruction applies to:

    a. The OSD, the Military Departments (including their Reserve Components), the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

    b. All DoD operations, activities, and real property in the United States, including public
lands withdrawn from all forms of appropriation under public land laws and reserved for use by
the Department of Defense. Overseas operations and activities will follow the policy and
guidance set forth in DoD Instruction (DoDI) 4715.05 and DoD 4715.05-G (References (c) and
(d)).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

    a. Manage and maintain cultural resources under DoD control in a sustainable manner
through a comprehensive program that considers the preservation of historic, archaeological,
                                                               DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

architectural, and cultural values; is mission supporting; and results in sound and responsible
stewardship.

   b. Be an international and national leader in the stewardship of cultural resources by
promoting and interpreting the cultural resources it manages to inspire DoD personnel and to
encourage and maintain U.S. public support for its military.

   c. Consult in good faith with internal and external stakeholders and promote partnerships to
manage and maintain cultural resources by developing and fostering positive partnerships with
Federal, tribal, State, and local government agencies; professional and advocacy organizations;
and the general public.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The annual Real Property Inventory data submission
has been assigned Report Control Symbol (RCS) DD-AT&L(A) 760 in accordance with DoD
Manual 8910.01 (Reference (e)).


8. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


9. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this Instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (f)).


10. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective September 18, 2008.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   4. Programming and Budgeting Priorities for Cultural Resources Programs
   5. Cultural Resources Management Measures of Merit



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             2
                           DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

   6. ICRMP Contents
   Glossary




Change 2, 08/31/2018   3
                                                                                           DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS

REFERENCES ...............................................................................................................................5

RESPONSIBILITIES ......................................................................................................................6

     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY,
       AND LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)) .......................................................................................6
     ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
       ENVIRONMENT ASD(EI&E)) ...........................................................................................6
     ASD(R&E)) ...............................................................................................................................7
     USD(P&R) .................................................................................................................................7
     USD(C)/CFO .............................................................................................................................7
     HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS ..................................................................................8

PROCEDURES..............................................................................................................................11

PROGRAMMING AND BUDGETING PRIORITIES FOR CULTURAL PROGRAMS .........14

     RECURRING CULTURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS ..............14
     NON-RECURRING CULTURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS ....14

CULTURAL RESOURCES METRICS ........................................................................................15

     HEALTH OF THE INVENTORY OF CULTURAL RESOURCES ......................................15
     HEALTH OF THE CULTURAL RESOURCES PROGRAM ...............................................21
     ADDITIONAL INFORMATION............................................................................................21

ICRMP CONTENTS .....................................................................................................................23

     GENERAL CONTENTS .........................................................................................................24
     SPECIFIC CONTENTS...........................................................................................................25

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................27

     ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................27
     TERMS AND DEFINITIONS.................................................................................................27




Change 2, 08/31/2018                                                  4                                                     CONTENTS
                                                                       DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

                                              ENCLOSURE 1

                                               REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
      Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(b)   DoD Directive 4715.1E, “Environment, Safety, and Occupational Health (ESOH),”
      March 19, 2005
(c)   DoD Instruction 4715.05, “Environmental Compliance at Installations Outside the United
      States,” November 1, 2013
(d)   DoD 4715.05-G, “Overseas Environmental Baseline Guidance Document,” May 1, 2007
(e)   DoD Manual 8910.01, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for DoD Internal
      Information Collections,” Volume 1, April 19, 2017
(f)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
      Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
      of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(g)   Title 54, United States Code
(h)   Executive Order 13287, “Preserve America,” March 3, 2003
(i)   DoD 7000.14-R, “DoD Financial Management Regulation,” as amended
(j)   DoD Directive 4165.06, “Real Property,” October 13, 2004
(k)   DoD Instruction 4165.70, “Real Property Management,” April 6, 2005
(l)   Parts 60, 65, 79, 800, 1220, and 1228 of title 36, Code of Federal Regulations
(m)   Executive Order 13007, “Indian Sacred Sites,” May 24, 1996
(n)   Section 3001 of title 25, United States Code
(o)   Part 10 of title 43, Code of Federal Regulations
(p)   Federal Register, Volume 48, Page 44716, “Secretary of the Interior’s Professional
      Qualification Standards,” September 29, 1983
(q)   Section 1996 of title 42, United States Code
(r)   Part 229 of title 32, Code of Federal Regulations
(s)   DoD Instruction 4710.02, “DoD Interactions with Federally-Recognized Tribes,”
      September 14, 2006
(t)   Executive Order 13327, “Federal Real Property Asset Management,” February 6, 2004
(u)   Federal Real Property Council, Guidance for Real Property Inventory Reporting (Issued
      Annually) 1
(v)   Part 102-75.1160 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations
(w)   Title 16, United States Code
(x)   DoD Directive 4715.11, “Environmental and Explosives Safety Management on
      Operational Ranges Within the United States,” May 10, 2004
(y)   DoD 4245.8-H, “Value Engineering,” March 17, 1986




1
 Available from https://www.gsa.gov/policy-regulations/policy/real-property-policy/asset-management/federal-real-
property-council-frpc/frpc-guidance-library


Change 2, 08/31/2018                                   5                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                        RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L) shall oversee implementation of this Instruction.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
ENVIRONMENT (ASD(EI&E)). The ASD(EI&E) under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(AT&L), shall:

   a. Establish additional cultural resources guidance, where necessary, in accordance with
Reference (b).

    b. Designate responsibilities and provide procedures for implementing the DoD cultural
resources program.

   c. Ensure that readiness, sustainability, and cost-effectiveness policies and the military
mission are facilitated through the maximum continued and adaptive use of cultural resources.

   d. Support DoD Component cultural resources budget requirements.

    e. In coordination with the Heads of the DoD Components, establish goals and objectives for
the DoD cultural resources program.

    f. Monitor implementation of this Instruction, including adherence to funding priorities for
cultural resources (Enclosure 4), the use of appropriate measures of merit (Enclosure 5), and the
annual review of the DoD Component cultural resources programs.

   g. Identify opportunities for improved efficiency through increased interagency and DoD
Component cooperation, information sharing, technology demonstration and transfer, and public
communication.

    h. Review all DoD Directives and Instructions and identify appropriate linkages between
cultural resources issues and other DoD programs.

   i. Integrate the DoD cultural resources program with other installations and environment
programs, including business enterprise integration, environmental management, safety,
occupational health, facilities, installations requirements, and project planning programs.

    j. Mandate DoD Component use of Integrated Cultural Resource Management Plans
(ICRMPs) as the DoD instrument for compliance with the statutory management requirements of
the applicable references of this issuance.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

    k. Coordinate with other Federal Agencies on cultural resources matters of national or
regional scope.

   l. Consult with DoD Components to obtain technical expertise on cultural resources issues of
agency-wide scope.

    m. Coordinate cultural resources issues and policies of general DoD interest with the
Installation Capability Council.

   n. Designate a DoD Federal Preservation Officer (FPO) and DoD Deputy Federal
Preservation Officer (DFPO) in accordance with section 306104 of title 54, United States Code
(U.S.C.) (Reference (g)) to oversee implementation and compliance with this Instruction.

   o. Serve as the designated Senior Policy Official as defined by E.O. 13287 (Reference (h)),
with oversight responsibility for the DoD historic preservation program.

    p. Work with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer
(USD(C)/CFO) to develop and implement a process to accurately account for cultural resources
included in DoD Financial Management Regulation 7000.14-R (Reference (i)).

    q. Work with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering ASD(R&E)
to develop and implement an integrated and coordinated science and technology program to
address cultural resources program requirements.


3. ASD(R&E). The ASD(R&E), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L),
shall:

   a. Develop and implement an integrated and coordinated science and technology program to
address the cultural resources program requirements identified by the ASD(EI&E).

   b. Ensure that critical cultural resources technologies emerging from the technology base are
demonstrated, validated, and certified for DoD use.


4. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R) shall:

   a. Develop policy that requires incorporation of cultural resources values into DoD
education and training.

    b. In coordination with USD(AT&L) and the Heads of the DoD Components, facilitate in
identifying opportunities for efficiencies in providing cultural resources training through
increased interagency and DoD Component cooperation.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            7                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

5. USD(C)/CFO. The USD(C)/CFO shall work with ASD(EI&E) to develop and implement a
process to accurately account for cultural resources included in Reference (i).

6. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

    a. Ensure compliance with this Instruction, including compliance by tenant activities.
Develop and implement programs to monitor, achieve, and maintain compliance with applicable
Federal statutory requirements related to cultural resource management as required by applicable
references of this Instruction.

    b. Plan, program, budget, and execute adequate resources consistent with Enclosure 4 of this
Instruction, other DoD guidance and fiscal policies, installation planning, and future deadlines.

    c. Ensure that sufficient qualified personnel are available to carry out the requirements of
this Instruction.

   d. Develop and implement a process to fully integrate cultural resources planning processes
with broader planning activities. Integrate cultural resources management with other facilities
management systems and processes to provide the greatest overall program effectiveness and
business efficiency.

   e. Ensure that installations prepare, maintain, and implement provisions of their ICRMP in
accordance with Enclosure 6 of this Instruction, and in consultation with State Historic
Preservation Officers (SHPOs), Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (THPOs), and other
appropriate consulting parties.

        (1) Ensure that these plans are fully coordinated with appropriate installation offices
responsible for preparing and maintaining training plans and master plans (including but not
limited to: training and test range management plans, range complex master plans, installation
master plans, integrated natural resources management plans, integrated pest management plans,
endangered species recovery plans, recreational and golf course management plans, grounds
maintenance plans, facilities construction site approvals, and other land use activities).

      (2) Ensure that each plan is reviewed annually, updated as mission or environmental
changes warrant, and revised and approved by appropriate command levels at least every 5 years.

    f. Ensure that current information on known cultural resources is collected, interpreted, and
disseminated to commanders and their staffs to support informed decisions about the
management of cultural resources. The Department of Defense will ensure that this information
is also available (subject to the appropriate confidentiality and security considerations) to
consulting parties, as well as residents, visitors, scholars, and the general public, to increase
awareness of the significance of archaeological resources on DoD lands as a means to protect
and preserve these items of national heritage in accordance with sections 302101-303903, and
306101-307108 of Reference (g).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

    g. Establish a systematic process to identify and evaluate cultural resources, including the
use of archeological models. Use historic contexts to determine historic significance, as
appropriate.

    h. Consider creative and alternative strategies to avoid, minimize, or mitigate adverse effects
to cultural resources.

    i. Develop and implement a process to evaluate and approve nominations of DoD-managed
cultural resources to the National Register of Historic Places.

    j. Employ innovative technical and design practices to preserve the fabric, systems,
character, and function of historic real property assets and facilitate sustainable mission use of
these assets with the minimum loss of historic integrity.

   k. Maximize reuse of historic buildings and structures, where justified by an objective
analysis of life-cycle benefits and costs, before disposal, new construction, or leasing in
accordance with DoDD 4165.06 and DoDI 4165.70 (References (j) and (k)).

    l. Consider systematic deconstruction and architectural salvage of historic building fabric
when replacement or demolition is necessary, especially where historic fabric may be reused to
preserve other similar properties in the inventory.

   m. Use non-invasive techniques, where technologically and economically appropriate, to
make determinations of eligibility or significance, to protect the site, and to minimize curation
needs.

    n. Provide for long-term curation for archaeological collections and associated records in
repositories that provide professional, systematic, and accountable curation services that are cost-
effective and provide for current and future research needs in accordance with section 79 of title
36, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) (Reference (l)).

    o. Build stable and enduring relationships with area-affiliated Federally-recognized Indian
tribes, Alaska Native entities, and Native Hawaiian organizations related to undertakings that
may have the potential to affect cultural resources of interest to these groups. It is understood
that some natural resources, such as certain types of plants and animals, may be included as
cultural resources of interest to these groups.

   p. Provide Federally-recognized Indian tribes, Alaska Native entities, and Native Hawaiian
organizations with access to and ceremonial use of sacred sites by religious practitioners on
DoD-managed lands, to the extent practicable, permitted by law, and not clearly inconsistent
with the military mission, and subject to safety and security considerations in accordance with
E.O. 13007 (Reference (m)).

   q. Maintain complete and current information on cultural items under DoD possession and
control as defined in section 3001 of title 25, U.S.C. (Reference (n)), including those uncovered




Change 2, 08/31/2018                              9                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

through inadvertent discovery or intentional excavation. Provide for final disposition in
accordance with the processes outlined in part 10 of title 43, CFR (Reference (o)).

   r. Establish appropriate partnerships with government, public, and private organizations to
promote local economic development and vitality through the use of DoD historic properties in a
manner that contributes to the long-term preservation and productive use of those properties.

    s. Promote partnerships with communities to increase opportunities for public benefit from,
and access to, DoD cultural resources, taking into account mission activities, sustainability,
safety and security issues, and fiscal soundness.

    t. Ensure cultural resources personnel are properly qualified and trained appropriate to their
responsibilities in accordance with Volume 48 of the Federal Register (Reference (p)), and that
their cultural resources responsibilities are proportionately represented in their performance
evaluations.

   u. Designate an FPO and DFPO to oversee compliance with this Instruction.

   v. Through the DoD FPO, advise and consult on cultural resources issues and policies of
general DoD interest to ASD(EI&E).

    w. Promptly notify the ASD(EI&E), through the DoD FPO, of significant cultural resources
issues.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            10                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. Cultural resources management is a dynamic process. Each DoD installation or activity will
use a cultural resources management approach that includes:

   a. Assessment of the military mission.

   b. Preparation of detailed inventories of cultural resources.

   c. Analysis and assessment of risk to the cultural resources.

   d. Preparation of management plans.

   e. Implementation of management plans.

   f. Monitoring and assessment of results.

   g. Completion of needs assessments survey.

   h. Maintaining currency of inventories.

   i. Reanalysis and reassessment of risk to cultural resources.

   j. Adjustments to the overall program, as necessary.


2. Detailed inventories of cultural resources are an essential initial step in managing an
installation’s cultural resources:

    a. The cultural resources survey of historic properties should include, at a minimum, the
identification and evaluation of all resources against the criteria of the National Register
performed by a professional meeting Reference (p) standards. Objects, properties of traditional
religious and cultural importance to an Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian organization, districts,
and landscapes covered by section 300101 et seq. of title 54 U.S.C. Reference (g) should also be
included. Resources that have not yet reached 50 years of age may be identified and evaluated
for significance against Consideration G of the National Register Evaluation Criteria in Part 60
of Reference (l), especially where in context with neighboring or adjoining resources over 50
years of age that share a similar mission use or originally-designed function.

    b. The cultural resources survey for archaeological resources on lands available for
archaeological survey (as defined in the Glossary) should include, at a minimum, a systematic
analysis by a professional meeting Reference (p) standards, in sufficient detail to make
generalizations about the type and distribution of archaeological properties that may be present.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            11                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

A cultural resources survey will usually include archival research and may include predictive
modeling, remote sensing, surface inspection, and subsurface testing to allow categorization of
archaeological potential or to determine presence or absence of archaeological properties.

    c. In all areas that might be adversely affected by military activities, such surveys as
described in paragraphs 2.a. and 2.b. of this enclosure should be followed by a systematic
detailed examination designed to gather information about cultural resources sufficient to
evaluate them against predetermined criteria of significance, within specific historic contexts, to
determine eligibility for listing on the National Register. Sufficient analysis through research
and/or consultation should also be conducted to determine if the site may also be a sacred site
and/or property of traditional religious and cultural importance to an Indian tribe or Native
Hawaiian organization.


3. When an installation determines that the disclosure of information on the location or character
of cultural resources may create a substantial risk of harm, theft, or destruction of such resources,
invasion of privacy, trespass on Government property, interference with the military mission,
and/or interference with the rights guaranteed to tribal groups under section 1996 of title 42,
U.S.C. (Reference (q)), the installation shall ensure that documents and other data provided to
the public do not disclose such information. Information may be provided to other agencies and
parties in accordance with the confidentiality provisions of section 307103 of Reference (g) and
part 229 of title 32, CFR (Reference (r)).


4. Early in the planning for any undertaking, the DoD proponent shall start consultation to
explain the undertaking and work with stakeholders to define the area of potential effects,
identify cultural resources, and determine potential effects to those resources. Consultation shall
be undertaken with the SHPO and/or THPO and, as appropriate, with:

   a. External stakeholders, including the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation,
Federally-recognized Indian tribes and Alaska Native entities, Native Hawaiian organizations,
and other interested organizations and individuals as defined in section 300101 et seq. of
Reference (g) and part 800 of Reference (l).

   b. Internal stakeholders which may include, but are not limited to master planning offices,
public works divisions, range management activities, facility managers, and other environmental
management functions.


5. An economic analysis shall be conducted on all National Register (eligible or listed) historic
properties that are being considered for demolition and replacement. The economic analysis of
the historic property shall consider the life-cycle cost of the property, incorporating as required
those life-cycle costs for historic elements that are significantly different from life-cycle costs for
the equivalent new or replacement elements. The economic analysis of the proposed
replacement property shall consider the total cost of the replacement project by whatever source
funded, including (but not limited to) as appropriate, demolition and disposal of debris, new land



Change 2, 08/31/2018                              12                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

acquisition, and site remediation and preparation. If the economic analysis demonstrates that the
renovation and life-cycle cost of the historic property will exceed the total replacement project
cost and the life-cycle cost of the new construction, replacement construction may be used.
However, this threshold may be exceeded where the significance of a particular historic structure
warrants special attention.


6. Consultation with Federally-recognized Indian tribes, Alaska Native entities, and Native
Hawaiian organizations is required by law regarding the disposition of cultural items, as defined
in Reference (n), or when a site of religious or cultural importance to tribes as defined in part 800
of Reference (l) is found on DoD property. If such items are encountered, the requirements of
References (n) and (r) must be met. The installation should consult with the tribe(s) in
accordance with DoDI 4710.02 (Reference (s)) at the earliest point in the planning process, and
should take into account the interests of the potentially affected tribe(s) when carrying out the
action.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             13                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

                                         ENCLOSURE 4

                      PROGRAMMING AND BUDGETING PRIORITIES
                        FOR CULTURAL RESOURCES PROGRAMS


1. RECURRING CULTURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS. Includes
activities needed to cover the recurring administrative, personnel, and other costs associated with
managing DoD cultural resource programs. This includes activities that are necessary in
achieving compliance with applicable DoD policies, Presidential memorandums, E.O.s, and
Federal statutory and regulatory requirements for the integrated management of cultural
resources or that are in direct support of mission. These activities include day-to-day costs of
sustaining an effective cultural resources management program as well as annual requirements
(those requirements that occur once per year, every year).


2. NON -RECURRING CULTURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS

    a. Includes projects and activities needed to manage and maintain cultural resources under
DoD control through a comprehensive program that considers the preservation of historic,
archaeological, architectural, and cultural values that is mission supporting and results in sound
and responsible stewardship.

   b. Those activities include, but are not limited to:

         (1) Preserving the fabric, systems, and historic character and function of the DoD-built
environment in a sustainable manner that supports the military mission and promotes the quality
of life and work of the occupants and employees.

       (2) Maintaining readiness while protecting U.S. heritage by incorporating cultural
resources planning into installation planning at the earliest possible time.

       (3) Supporting informed decisions about the management of cultural resources.

         (4) Consulting in good faith with internal and external stakeholders, including Federal,
State, tribal, and local government agencies; professional and advocacy organizations; and the
general public by developing and fostering positive partnerships to manage and maintain cultural
resources.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            14                                 ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

                                           ENCLOSURE 5

                               CULTURAL RESOURCES METRICS


1. HEALTH OF THE INVENTORY OF CULTURAL RESOURCES

    a. Historic Buildings and Structures – Built Infrastructure

        (1) Goal. Historic buildings and structures are maintained in good condition and used to
support mission needs. Utilization (Performance Measure #1), Condition Index (Performance
Measure #2), and Mission Dependency (Performance Measure #3) are three of the Office of
Management and Budget performance measures in accordance with E.O. 13327 (Reference (t))
and as defined in the current edition of the Federal Real Property Council Guidance for Real
Property Reporting (Reference (u)). For full analysis, compare to non-historic buildings and
structures.

          (2) Activities That Must Report. United States – All installations with real property
assets.

          (3) Potential Data Sources

             (a) Federal Real Property Inventory

             (b) OSD Real Property Asset Database

          (4) What to Report

             (a) Baseline data: number of buildings or structures that are historic properties.

            (b) Any buildings or structures in the DoD Real Property Inventory with historical
status data element (as defined in Reference (u)) of individually listed National Historic
Landmark (NHLI), contributing element to a National Historic Landmark district (NHLC),
individually listed on the National Register (NRLI), contributing element to a National Register
district (NRLC), individually eligible for the National Register (NREI), or eligible as a
contributing element to an eligible National Register district (NREC).

             (c) UNIT – Each

                 1. Number of NHLI Assets

                 2. Number of NHLC Assets

                 3. Number of NRLI Assets

                 4. Number of NRLC Assets



Change 2, 08/31/2018                              15                                ENCLOSURE 5
                                                               DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008



               5. Number of NREI Assets

               6. Number of NREC Assets

           (d) Metric: Percent of historic properties that are utilized or over-utilized.

              1. Of the NHLI, NHLC, NRLI, NRLC, NREI, or NREC buildings or structures in
the Federal Real Property Inventory, report the number that have a category of “Utilized” or
“Over-Utilized.”

               2. UNIT – Each. (Note: There are four options in the Federal Real Property
Inventory for utilization – “Over-Utilized,” “Utilized,” “Under-Utilized,” and “Not Utilized.”
See part 102-75.1160 of title 41, CFR (Reference (v)) for more information.

                   a. Number of Over-Utilized (NHLI) Assets

                   b. Number of Utilized (NHLI) Assets

                   c. Number of Over-Utilized (NHLC) Assets

                   d. Number of Utilized (NHLC) Assets

                   e. Number of Over-Utilized (NRLI) Assets

                   f. Number of Utilized (NRLI) Assets

                   g. Number of Over-Utilized (NRLC) Assets

                   h. Number of Utilized (NRLC) Assets

                   i. Number of Over-Utilized (NREI) Assets

                   j. Number of Utilized (NREI) Assets

                   k. Number of Over-Utilized (NREC) Assets

                   l. Number of Utilized (NREC) Assets

          (e) Metric – Percent of historic properties that have a high facility physical quality
code (based on Condition Index as noted in paragraph 1.a.(3) of this enclosure).

              1. Of the NHLI, NHLC, NRLI, NRLC, NREI, or NREC buildings or structures in
the DoD Real Property Inventory, the number that have a facility physical quality code of
Quality Rating, Level 2 (Q2) or above.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            16                                 ENCLOSURE 5
                                                              DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

               2. UNIT – Each

                  a. Number of NHLI Assets at Quality Rating, Level 1 (Q1)

                  b. Number of NHLI Assets at Q2

                  c. Number of NHLC Assets at Q1

                  d. Number of NHLC Assets at Q2

                  e. Number of NRLI Assets at Q1

                  f. Number of NRLI Assets at Q2

                  g. Number of NREI Assets at Q1

                  h. Number of NREI Assets at Q2

                  i. Number of NREC Assets at Q1

                  j. Number of NREC Assets at Q2

           (f) Metric – Percent of historic buildings or structures used to support mission needs.
Number of buildings or structures that are historic properties that are “Utilized” or “Over-
Utilized.”

              1. Of the NHLI, NHLC, NRLI, NRLC, NREI, or NREC buildings or structures in
the DoD Real Property Inventory, the number that are mission critical (MC) or mission
dependent, not critical (MDNC).

               2. UNIT – Each

                  a. Number of MC NHLI Assets

                  b. Number of MDNC NHLI Assets

                  c. Number of MC NHLC Assets

                  d. Number of MDNC NHLC Assets

                  e. Number of MC NRLI Assets

                  f. Number of MDNC NRLI Assets

                  g. Number of MC NRLC Assets




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            17                               ENCLOSURE 5
                                                              DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

                  h. Number of MDNC NRLC Assets

                  i. Number of MC NREI Assets

                  j. Number of MDNC NREI Assets

                  k. Number of MC NREC Assets

                  l. Number of MDNC NREC Assets

           (g) Metric – Demolition of historic buildings or structures.

              1. Number of buildings or structures that are historic properties that were
demolished in the previous fiscal year (FY). Of the NHLI, NHLC, NRLI, NRLC, NREI, or
NREC buildings or structures in the DoD Real Property Inventory, the number that were
demolished during the previous FY.

               2. UNIT – Each

                  a. Number of NHLI buildings demolished in the previous FY

                  b. Number of NHLC buildings demolished in the previous FY

                  c. Number of NRLI buildings demolished in the previous FY

                  d. Number of NRLC buildings demolished in the previous FY

                  e. Number of NREI buildings demolished in the previous FY

                  f. Number of NREC buildings demolished in the previous FY

   b. Curation of Archaeological Collections and Associated Records

       (1) Goal. Archaeological collections and associated records are curated in accordance
with part 79 of Reference (l).

        (2) Activities That Must Report. United States – All installations with archaeological
collections and associated records.

       (3) Potential Data Sources

           (a) Component submissions to the Secretary of the Interior’s Report to Congress on
the Federal Archaeology Program

           (b) Heritage Assets Report




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           18                                ENCLOSURE 5
                                                               DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

       (4) What to Report

           (a) Metric – Compliant curation of archaeological collections and associated records.

           (b) Total volume less volume curated should be less than or equal to the volume
acquired during the previous FY.

           (c) UNIT – Cubic Feet

               1. Volume of collections requiring curation

               2. Volume of collections curated to section 79 of Reference (l)

               3. Volume of collections acquired during the previous FY

           (d) UNIT – Linear Feet

               1. Associated records requiring curation

               2. Associated records curated to section 79 of Reference (l)

               3. Associated records acquired during the previous FY


2. HEALTH OF THE CULTURAL RESOURCES PROGRAM

   a. Inventory and Evaluation of Historic Properties (Real Property Assets)

        (1) Goal. All real property inventory records will accurately identify historic properties
(real property assets).

        (2) Activities That Must Report. United States – All installations with historic properties
(real property assets).

       (3) Potential Data Sources

           (a) Federal Real Property Report

           (b) OSD Real Property Asset Database

       (4) What to Report

           (a) Metric – Percent of real property assets with the appropriate Historical Status
Data Element Code, compared to “not yet evaluated” (NEV) assets that are greater than or equal
to 50 years old.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            19                                ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

         (b) UNIT – Each. Note: To calculate percentage, compare first nine categories to
NEV greater than or equal to 50 years old. Trend should be reduction of assets identified as
NEV greater than or equal to 50 years old.

               1. Number of NHLI Assets

               2. Number of NHLC Assets

               3. Number of NRLI Assets

               4. Number of NRLC Assets

               5. Number of NREI Assets

               6. Number of NREC Assets

               7. Number of Eligible for the Purposes of a Program Alternative Assets

               8. Number of Non-contributing Element Assets

               9. Number of Evaluated, Not Historic Assets

               10. Number of NEV Assets greater than or equal to 50 years old

               11. Number of NEV Assets less than 50 years old

   b. Inventory of Historic Properties (Archaeological Sites)

        (1) Goal. All DoD-managed lands that are available for survey are surveyed for
archaeological sites and have the information readily available to support the process directed by
section 300101 et seq. of Reference (g).

       (2) Activities That Must Report. United States – All installations with historic properties
(archaeological sites).

       (3) Potential Data Sources

           (a) Component submissions to the Secretary of the Interior’s Report to Congress on
the Federal Archaeology Program

           (b) National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Documents

       (4) What to Report

          (a) Metric – Percent of DoD-managed lands (available for survey) surveyed for
archaeological sites.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            20                               ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008



            (b) UNIT –Acres

                1. Number of total DoD-managed acres, by Service

                2. Number of DoD-managed acres, by Service, available for survey

               3. Number of DoD-managed acres, by Service, available for survey and surveyed
for archaeological sites


3. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

    a. Geographic Information System (GIS)

         (1) Goal. All installations with cultural resources will have information available in a
GIS.

         (2) Activities That Must Report. United States – All installations with cultural resources.

         (3) What to Report

            (a) Metric – Archaeological site information reflected in a GIS.

            (b) UNIT – Number of Acres.

                1. Number of DoD-managed acres, by DoD Component, with archaeological
sites.

               2. Number of DoD-managed acres, by DoD Component, available for survey and
surveyed for archaeological sites for which information is available through a GIS.

            (c) Metric – Percent of installations Historic Real Property Asset information
reflected in a GIS.

            (d) UNIT – Number.

                1. Number of installations that have cultural resources.

              2. Number of installations that have historic properties (real property assets) for
which information is available through a GIS.

    b. ICRMPs




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             21                                ENCLOSURE 5
                                                              DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

        (1) Goal. All installations with cultural resources will complete and update ICRMPs as
per this policy. In addition, all ICRMPs will be current and implemented, in consultation and
partnership with SHPOs, THPOs, and other appropriate consulting parties.

       (2) Activities That Must Report. United States – All installations with cultural resources.

       (3) What to Report

          (a) Metric – Percent of total ICRMPs, by DoD Component, complete; and percent of
total ICRMPs, by DoD Component, developed in consultation.

           (b) UNIT – Number

               1. Number of installations that have cultural resources and, therefore, are
required to have an ICRMP.

               2. Number of installations that have cultural resources that have completed
ICRMPs.

               3. Number of installations that have cultural resources that have completed
ICRMPs that have been developed in consultation with SHPOs, THPOs, and other appropriate
consulting parties.

               4. Number of installations that have completed inventories and have been granted
a waiver by the Service Component, in consultation with SHPOs, THPOs, and other appropriate
consulting parties, to prepare an ICRMP.

   c. Public Access to Cultural Resource Information

        (1) Goal. All installations with cultural resources will have a public outreach program in
accordance with the implementation of section 470ii(c) of Title 16, U.S.C. (Reference (w)) and
section 4b of Reference (h).

       (2) Activities That Must Report. United States – All installations with cultural resources.

       (3) What to Report

            (a) Metric – Percent of installations with cultural resources that have public Web
sites and/or tour programs.

           (b) UNIT – Each

               1. Number of installations with cultural resources.

             2. Number of installations with cultural resources that have a cultural resources
public Web page or a cultural resources area on an installation’s main Web page.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            22                                ENCLOSURE 5
                                                              DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008



                3. Number of installations with cultural resources that have regularly scheduled
public tours of cultural resources.

               4. Number of installations with cultural resources that include cultural resource
information in a welcome package for new residents and/or employees and visitors.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            23                               ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

                                          ENCLOSURE 6

                                       ICRMP CONTENTS


1. GENERAL CONTENTS. An ICRMP shall:

    a. Include a summary of general information about the installation’s mission and history, as
well as specific management information necessary for managing the installation’s cultural
resources.

    b. Provide cultural resources context information pertinent to the full range of cultural
resources within the installation’s jurisdiction.

   c. Identify all legal requirements pertinent to cultural resources management.

    d. Identify the installation’s cultural resources, including areas characterized as to potential
for cultural resources and a prioritized list for further identification or survey.

    e. Recommend procedures and related funding requirements for managing the installation’s
cultural resources in a manner that is compatible with the installation mission and satisfies legal
requirements.

    f. Establish priorities and related funding requirements for cultural resources management
that ensure support of the mission, compliance with legal requirements, and ongoing stewardship
responsibilities.

   g. Provide management procedures for the ongoing identification, maintenance, and
enhancement of cultural resources.

    h. Promote the use of cultural resources in ways that are beneficial to the military mission,
the resources, and other public interests.

    i. Be thoroughly integrated with other installation plans, including but not limited to the
installation master plan, the facilities maintenance plan, training and range area management
plans, natural resources management plans, mobilization and deployment plans, and information
management systems.

   j. Establish requirements, goals, and targets that can be easily reflected in budget documents
and decision-making processes and addressed in conservation self-assessments.

    k. Address cultural resources and areas of critical or special concern from both technical and
policy standpoints.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             24                                 ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008



2. SPECIFIC CONTENTS. An ICRMP shall include, as appropriate:

   a. A summary of known cultural resources information and a list and brief description of
properties listed or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.

    b. Analysis of the sufficiency of the existing information on cultural resources and
associated contexts to meet compliance requirements.

    c. Information on areas that have not been surveyed and a plan for completion of the
surveys.

    d. Identification and prioritization of actions required to implement goals and objectives of
the plan.

   e. Identification of the type and location of actions that may affect cultural resources.

    f. Procedures to ensure that actions of the installation and its tenants are planned and carried
out in ways that protect and enhance its cultural resources.

   g. Identification of unique cultural resource issues confronting the installation.

   h. Preservation and mitigation strategies for threatened cultural resources.

   i. Coordination processes between the installation, regulatory agencies (such as the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation, SHPOs, and THPOs), stakeholders, and the public that help to
ensure proper management of an installation’s cultural resources.

   j. Provisions for permanent storage of historic property records, as required by parts 1220
and 1228 of Reference (l) and other recordkeeping requirements.

    k. Standard operating procedures for routine occurrences and where blanket statements can
coordinate a process, such as inventories, repetitive maintenance and repair, unanticipated
discoveries and reporting, and spill responses where cultural resources are involved and tailored
for the particular conditions at the installation.

    l. Procedures for the documentation of historic properties that will be altered or destroyed as
a result of DoD action or assistance, in accordance with part 800 of Reference (l).

    m. Procedures to respond to unanticipated discovery of a historic property or other cultural
resource.

   n. Procedures to ensure that all archaeological collections are properly processed,
maintained, and preserved in accordance with part 79 of Reference (l).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             25                                ENCLOSURE 6
                                                              DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

   o. Provisions for sharing appropriate cultural resources information with Federal and State
agencies, nongovernmental organizations, researchers, stakeholders, and the general public.

    p. Provisions for enforcement of cultural resource laws and regulations by professionally
trained personnel.

   q. Provisions for public access to cultural resources, as appropriate.

    r. Explicit summary of the process for integrating the National Historic Preservation Act
section 106 planning process with the installation’s production of environmental assessment
documents in accordance with Reference (l).

   s. Provisions to address funding priorities and protocols for the specific program
requirements listed above.

   t. Procedures to proactively consider the use of innovative mitigation to satisfy the
requirements of part 800 of Reference (l) when feasible and supportive of the mission.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            26                                ENCLOSURE 6
                                                               DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

                                           GLOSSARY

                             ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


DFPO                  Deputy Federal Preservation Officer
DoDD                  Department of Defense Directive

FPO                   Federal Preservation Officer
FY                    fiscal year

GIS                   Geographic Information System

ICRMP                 Integrated Cultural Resource Management Plan

MC                    mission critical
MDNC                  mission dependent, not critical

NEPA                  National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
NEV                   not yet evaluated
NHLI                  individually listed national historic landmark
NHLC                  contributing element to a national historic landmark district
NHPA                  National Historic Preservation Act of 1966
NREI                  individually eligible for the National Register
NREC                  eligible as a contributing element to an eligible National Register district
NRLI                  individually listed on the National Register
NRLC                  contributing element to a National Register district

PRV                   plant replacement value

Q1                    Quality Rating, Level 1
Q2                    Quality Rating, Level 2

SHPO                  State Historic Preservation Officer

THPO                  Tribal Historic Preservation Officer


                                  TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this Instruction.

alternative or creative mitigation. Alternatives to archaeological data recovery as mitigation for
an undertaking’s adverse effects. These approaches can be implemented as the only treatment
option, or can be part of a package where different historic properties are subject to different
kinds and levels of mitigation.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                            27                                     GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008



archaeological survey. An examination by an individual that meets the qualification standards of
Reference (p) of all or part of an area accomplished in sufficient detail to make generalizations
about the types and distributions of archaeological properties that may be present.

available for archaeological survey. All DoD-managed lands, excluding impact areas as defined
in DoDD 4715.11 (Reference (x)); surface danger zones; lands under water that are always at
least 5 feet deep on a year-round basis; and danger zones as defined in part 334 of Reference (v).

cultural resources.

    Historic properties (any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, or object as
defined by part 800 of Reference (l) included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National
Register of Historic Places, whether or not such eligibility has been formally determined),
including artifacts, records, and material remains related to such a property or resource.

       cultural items as defined in Reference (n).

   American Indian, Eskimo, Aleut, or Native Hawaiian sacred sites as defined in Reference
(m).

       archaeological resources as defined in section 470 aa-mm of Reference (w).

       archaeological artifact collections and associated records as defined in part 79 of Reference
(l).

facility physical quality code. A code used to depict the capability of existing facilities as
measured by a condition index as defined in Enclosure 4 of DoD 4245.8-H (Reference (y)):

   Q1. The sum of all necessary restoration and modernization costs is not greater than 10
percent of the replacement value of the facility (PRV).

    Q2. The sum of all necessary restoration and modernization costs is greater than 10 percent
but not greater than 20 percent of the PRV.

Federal Preservation Officer. A qualified official as defined by section 306104 of Reference (g).

historic property. Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, or object as
defined by part 800 of Reference (l) included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National
Register of Historic Places, whether or not such eligibility has been formally determined. This
may include properties of traditional religious and cultural importance to Federally-recognized
Indian tribes, Alaska Native entities, and Native Hawaiian organizations.

ICRMP. A plan that defines the process for the management of cultural resources on DoD
installations.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                                 28                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                DoDI 4715.16, September 18, 2008

mission dependency. The value an asset brings to the performance of the mission as determined
by the governing agency in accordance with Reference (u) in one of the following categories:

   MC. Without constructed asset or parcel of land, mission is compromised.

   MDNC. Does not fit into MC or not mission dependent categories.

   not mission dependent. Mission unaffected.

   not rated. DoD and base realignment and closure properties only.

mitigation. Addressing the adverse effects an undertaking may cause relative to cultural
resources. Mitigation can include: repairing, rehabilitating, restoring, or documenting the
affected resource; reducing or eliminating the effect over time by preservation and maintenance
operations during the life of the action; and/or compensating for the effect by providing or
preserving substitute resources or environments.

National Historic Landmark. Nationally significant historic places designated by the Secretary
of the Interior because they possess exceptional value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the
heritage of the United States. National Historic Landmark criteria are published in part 65 of
Reference (l).

National Register of Historic Places. The official Federal list of sites, districts, buildings,
structures, and objects worthy of preservation consideration because of significance in U.S.
history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. Significance may be local, State, or
national in scope. National Register eligibility criteria are published in part 60 of Reference (l).

needs assessment survey. An inventory of an installation’s inventories, management plans,
personnel, training, supplies, equipment, and other management tools to identify future actions
and resources needed for the installation to comply with the requirements of this Instruction.

plant replacement value. As defined in Enclosure 4 of Reference (y), the cost to replace a
facility using current standards.

stewardship. The management of resources entrusted to one’s care in a way that preserves and
enhances the resources and their benefits for present and future generations.

tribe. Defined in section 470bb of Reference (w).

undertaking. Any Federal, Federally-assisted, or Federally-licensed action, activity, or program,
new or continuing, as per section 300101 et seq. of Reference (g) and part 800 of Reference (l).

qualified cultural resources professional. An individual who meets the standards described in
Reference (p).




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             29                                     GLOSSARY
