                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 5400.13
                                                                               October 15, 2008

                                                                                         ASD(PA)

SUBJECT:      Public Affairs (PA) Operations

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive 5400.13 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction in accordance with
the guidance in DoD Instruction 5025.01 (Reference (b)) and the authority in DoD Directive
5122.5 (Reference (c)).

   b. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for the conduct of PA as a primary DoD
communications capability in accordance with Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum
(Reference (d)).

    c. Under the new title “Public Affairs (PA) Operations,” addresses PA roles and
responsibilities across the Department of Defense, to include the Secretaries of the Military
Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant
Commanders, and the Heads of the other DoD Components.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. DoD PA activities shall contribute to DoD objectives by communicating information
about military activities to domestic, international, and internal audiences.
                                                                DoDI 5400.13, October 15, 2008



    b. DoD PA activities capabilities shall be developed and employed to support the command
operations to assure the trust and confidence of U.S. population, friends and allies, deter and
dissuade adversaries, and counter misinformation and disinformation ensuring effective,
culturally appropriate information delivery in regional languages according to DoD Instruction
5160.70 (Reference (e)).

    c. DoD PA shall conduct communication analysis, assessment, and evaluation of PA
activities.

    d. DoD PA shall be integrated into joint exercises and training during planning of national-
level exercises as appropriate.

   e. DoD PA and information operations (IO) shall be coordinated to optimize effects and the
achievement of DoD goals.

   f. DoD PA activities and civil military operations shall be coordinated to optimize effects
and the achievement of DoD goals.

    g. DoD PA and other capabilities contributing to Defense support to public diplomacy shall
be coordinated to optimize effects and the achievement of DoD goals.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release. Copies
may be obtained through the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at
http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures:
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   Glossary




                                             2
                                                                                DoDI 5400.13, October 15, 2008

                                                   ENCLOSURE 1

                                                   REFERENCES


(a)      DoD Directive 5400.13, “Joint Public Affairs Operations,” January 9, 1996 (hereby
         canceled)
(b)      DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Directives Program,” October 28, 2007
(c)      DoD Directive 5122.5, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs (ASD(PA)),”
         September 27, 2000
(d)      Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “2006 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR)
         Strategic Communication (SC) Execution Roadmap,” February 6, 20061
(e)      DoD Instruction 5160.70, “Management of DoD Language and Regional Proficiency
         Capabilities,” June 12, 2007
(f)      DoD Instruction 5405.3, “Development of Proposed Public Affairs Guidance (PPAG),”
         April 5, 1991
(g)      DoD Instruction 5400.14, “Procedures for Joint Public Affairs Operations,”
         January 22, 1996
(h)      DoD Instruction 5040.02, “Visual Information (VI),” August 30, 2005
(i)      DoD Directive 5122.10, “American Forces Information Service (AFIS),”
         November 21, 2000
(j)      DoD Directive O-3600.01, “Information Operations (IO),” August 14, 2006
(k)      DoD Instruction 5040.04, “Joint Combat Camera (COMCAM) Program,” June 6, 2006
(l)      DoD Directive 5160.48, “DoD Public Affairs and Visual Information (PA&VI) Education
         and Training (E&T),” July 2, 2004
(m)      Joint Publication 1-02, “Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated
         Terms,” as amended
(n)      Joint Public Affairs Support Element (JPASE) Concept of Operations (CONOPS),
         May 30, 2006
(o)      Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Web Site Administration Policies and
         Procedures,” November 25, 1998 (as amended)
(p)      Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Interactive Internet Activity,” June 8, 2007
(q)      Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Trans Regional Web Policy,” August 3, 2007
(r)      Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memorandum 05-04, “Policies for Federal
         Agency Public Websites,” December 17, 2004
(s)      DoD Directive 5230.9, “Clearance of DoD Information for Public Release,”
         August 6, 1999
(t)      DoD Directive 8500.01E, “Information Assurance (IA),” October 24, 2002
(u)      DoD Instruction 8500.2, “Information Assurance (IA) Implementation,” February 6, 2003




1
    Available from the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs.


                                                        3                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 5400.13, October 15, 2008

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS (ASD(PA)). The
ASD(PA) shall:

    a. Retain primary responsibility for the implementation of DoD policy in this Instruction and
in accordance with Reference (c).

   b. Coordinate PA matters within the Department of Defense and with other Federal
departments and agencies.

    c. Publish DoD PA communications objectives for use in planning communications
strategies for military activities to support U.S. Government (USG) communication goals, as
necessary.

    d. Develop public information, command information, visual information, public affairs
guidance and community engagement policies, plans, and programs to support DoD objectives,
in coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Military Departments, and the
Combatant Commanders (Reference (c)), and according to the authority of Reference (d) through
Reference (e), DoD Instruction 5405.3 (Reference (f)), DoD Instruction 5400.14 (Reference
(g)), DoD Instruction 5040.02 (Reference (h)), DoD Directive 5122.10 (Reference (i)), DoD
Directive O-3600.01 (Reference (j)), DoD Instruction 5040.04 (Reference (k)), DoD Directive
5160.48 (Reference (l)), Joint Publication 1-02 (Reference (m)), Joint Public Affairs Support
Element (JPASE) Concept of Operations (CONOPS) (Reference (n)), Deputy Secretary of
Defense Memorandum, “Web Site Administration Policies and Procedures” (Reference (o)),
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Interactive Internet Activity” (Reference (p)),
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Trans Regional Web Policy” (Reference (q)),
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memorandum 05-04, “Policies for Federal Agency
Public Websites (Reference (r)), DoD Directive 5230. 9 (Reference (s)), DoD Directive
8500.01E (Reference (t)), DoD Instruction 8500.2 (Reference (u)).


2. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)). The USD(I) shall:

   a. Coordinate with the ASD(PA) on the development and implementation of policy for the
coordination, synchronization, and deconfliction of IO and PA in accordance with Reference (i).

   b. Coordinate and oversee intelligence support to PA.

   c. Work closely with PA professionals to identify specific needs for intelligence support, and
products, and provide intelligence analysis to support PA.




                                            4                                   ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5400.13, October 15, 2008

3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics shall
coordinate DoD-wide investment in the development of technologies needed to support PA
capabilities.


4. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall:

    a. Ensure that management of PA professionals is consistent with policies, plans, and
programs for total force management and requirements to ensure efficient and effective support
of wartime and peacetime operations, contingency planning, and preparedness.

   b. Ensure the management of PA professionals is consistent with policies, plans, and
programs for total force management requirements, to ensure efficient and effective support of
wartime and peacetime operations, contingency planning and preparedness.

   c. Coordinate with ASD(PA) to ensure PA professionals have access to, and knowledge to
employ, culture and language capabilities to plan, develop and assess communications strategies.


5. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

    a. Organize, fund, and equip active and reserve PA personnel and units to support the Joint
Strategic Capabilities Plan, Combatant Command requirements, and Service needs.

    b. Assign responsibilities and establish procedures within their organizations to implement
the policies in section 4 of this Instruction.

   c. Train PA personnel, commanders, and members and/or employees of the Military
Departments to successfully engage the public, including target populations in regional
operations areas via diverse news media outlets through training and simulation programs.

   d. Develop and conduct education, training, and exercise programs to provide for the
successful planning, integration, execution, and evaluation of PA.


6. DIRECTORS OF THE DEFENSE AGENCIES. The Directors of the Defense Agencies
shall:

   a. Inform PA officials of significant plans and activities.

    b. Conduct media relations, community engagement, and command information programs;
maintain command-sponsored publicly accessible Web Sites; and implement the DoD principles
of information in accordance with Reference (c). Web Sites must also be maintained in
compliance with other relevant policies, including References (n) through (t).



                                             5                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 5400.13, October 15, 2008




7. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities in paragraph 5 of this enclosure, shall:

   a. Ensure PA capability is sufficient to conduct and interface with the technologies
employed by target populations and regional partners for all planned and ongoing PA activities.

   b. Conduct Military Department-unique PA programs to achieve DoD objectives and
Military Department and other DoD Component communications goals.

    c. Provide PA training for non-PA personnel at Military Service schools to enhance DoD
capability to research, plan, execute, and assess communications strategies; foster media
relations; and improve internal communications across the Department of Defense.


8. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:

   a. Establish a Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff PA response cell within the National
Military Command Center, as necessary, to provide PA support to the Office of the ASD(PA).

   b. Support the Department of Defense in explaining defense programs and activities by
providing senior officers with expertise on matters of interest to the news media and the public.

    c. Plan for the employment of joint Combat Camera (COMCAM) assets in support of
military activities in accordance with DoD Instruction 5040.04 (Reference (j)). COMCAM shall
acquire and provide clear, timely, and unaltered documentation of military operations and
activities to support PA.

   d. Plan for the employment of reserve PA assets to support the public information and
command information requirements of mobilized Reserve Component units. PA assets
deploying to or transiting foreign territories shall be provided with appropriate capability to
communicate in languages of the territories as outlined in Reference (e).


9. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands shall:

   a. Resource, plan, and synchronize PA operations to support DoD and command
communications goals.

   b. Integrate PA into strategy development and operational planning and execution across the
spectrum of operations.

   c. Develop communications strategies that support USG communication goals.



                                              6                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 5400.13, October 15, 2008



   d. Integrate PA into security cooperation efforts.

   e. Ensure PA liaisons are established with U.S. embassies and other interagency partners,
non-governmental organizations, and host nations, as appropriate. Combatant Commanders shall
report all language and regional professional capabilities required for these liaison positions per
Reference (u).

   f. Integrate PA capabilities into joint exercise and training.

   g. Assess effectiveness of PA activities.

    h. Conduct PA in support of joint operations, including media relations, community
engagement, and command information programs; maintain command-sponsored publicly
accessible Web sites as outlined in References (n) through (t), and implement the DoD principles
of information in accordance with Reference (c).


10. COMMANDER, U.S. JOINT FORCES COMMAND. The Commander, U.S. Joint Forces
Command, shall serve as the designated proponent and sponsor for joint PA activities and shall:

   a. Maintain the Joint Public Affairs Support Element as a joint enabling capability for
expeditionary operations (Reference (m)).

   b. Maintain joint PA standards and requirements.

   c. Facilitate PA training and education for the Combatant Commands and deploying Joint
Forces.

    d. Coordinate with USD(I) and USD(P&R) to ensure language, culture, and regional
proficiency capabilities necessary for PA activities are available as outlined in Reference (u).


11. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. The General Counsel of
the Department of Defense shall provide legal advice and assistance to the Secretary of Defense
and other DoD officials on DoD PA, including the PA planning process and execution.




                                               7                                   ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 5400.13, October 15, 2008

                                           GLOSSARY

                                          DEFINITIONS


Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this Instruction.

civil military operations. See Reference (m).

communication assessment and evaluation. The ability to monitor, collect, and analyze
information obtained through available sources to determine the effectiveness of a commander’s
public communications activities.

community engagement. The process of working collaboratively with and through groups of
people affiliated by geographic proximity or special interest to enhance the understanding and
support for military operations and activities.

command information. The ability to communicate with members of the Military Departments,
civilian employees, contractors, and family members of the joint forces deployed and at home
bases, to create awareness of the goals and significant developments affecting deployed forces.

COMCAM. Visual information documentation covering air, sea, and ground actions of
members of the Military Departments who are in combat or combat support operations,
humanitarian operations, and related peacetime training activities, such as exercises, war games,
and operations, in support of the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the
Combatant Commands. (Reference (j)).

Defense support to public diplomacy. See Reference (m).

information operations. See Reference (m).

internal audiences. See Reference (m).

Joint Public Affairs Support Element. A U.S. Joint Forces Command joint enabling capability.
The Joint Public Affairs Support Element assists joint force commanders in developing PA
forces, through joint capability development and training, to plan and execute communication
strategies in joint, interagency, and multinational environments. When directed, the Joint Public
Affairs Support Element deploys in support of joint operations worldwide.

media pool. See Reference (m).

public affairs guidance. Approved PA postures and policies, official statements, answers to
anticipated media questions, and community engagement guidance to support the public
discussion of specific defense issues and operations. Such guidance can range from a telephonic
response to a specific question to a more comprehensive package. The public affairs guidance




                                              8                                       GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 5400.13, October 15, 2008

also addresses the method(s), timing, location, and other details governing the release of
information to the public.

public information. The ability to disseminate truthful, timely, and accurate information about
culturally attuned information about military activities, consistent with security guidelines, to
local, national, and international audiences.

PA. Public information, command information, and community engagement activities directed
toward both external and internal publics with interest in the Department of Defense. PA
activities contribute to USG Strategic Communication and DoD objectives by communicating
information about military activities to domestic, international, and internal audiences. As a
function of command, PA is an operational capability vital to meeting DoD public information
and communications requirements.

publicly accessible Web Sites. The collection of Internet media, services, supporting technology
and systems, available without access controls to an unlimited audience at a uniform resource
locator, a Web address that begins with a protocol indicator (e.g., http://, https://, and ftp://).
Publicly accessible Web Sites should not contain mission data, but may contain mission-related
data if the Web Site mission is to inform the public.

security cooperation. See Reference (m).

strategic communication. See Reference (m).

visual information. Use of one or more of the various visual media, with or without
sound, to include still photography, motion picture photography, video or audio recording,
graphic arts, visual aids, models, display, visual presentation services, and the support processes.




                                              9                                        GLOSSARY
