                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION
                                                                             NUMBER 1322.25
                                                                                 March 15, 2011
                                                  Incorporating Change 4, Effective April 2, 2020

                                                                                        USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Voluntary Education Programs

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 1322.25 (Reference (a)) in accordance with the
authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02 (Reference (b)) to implement the policy established
in DoDD 1322.08E (Reference (c)), incorporates and cancels DoD Instruction 1322.9 (Reference
(d)), and assign responsibilities and prescribe procedures for the operation of voluntary education
programs in the DoD.

   b. Establishes policy stating the eligibility criteria for tuition assistance (TA) and the
requirement for a memorandum of understanding (MOU) from all educational institutions
providing educational programs through the DoD TA Program.

   c. Establishes policy that:

       (1) All educational institutions providing education programs through the DoD Tuition
Assistance (TA) Program:

           (a) Will provide meaningful information to students about the financial cost and
attendance at an institution so military students can make informed decisions on where to attend
school.

            (b) Will not use unfair, deceptive, and abusive recruiting practices.

            (c) Will provide academic and student support services to Service members and their
families.

       (2) Creates rules to strengthen existing procedures for access to DoD installations by
educational institutions.
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


       (3) Requires an annual review and notification process if there are changes made to the
uniform semester-hour (or equivalent) TA caps and annual TA ceilings.

       (4) Requires the Military Departments to provide their Service members with a joint
services transcript (JST).

     (5) Establishes the DoD Postsecondary Education Complaint System for Service
members, spouses, and adult family members to register student complaints.

         (6) Authorizes the Military Departments to establish Service-specific TA eligibility
criteria and management controls.

   d. Establishes the Interservice Voluntary Education Board.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the DoD, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and
all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this Instruction as the
“DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy, consistent with Reference (c), that:

    a. Members of the Military Services serving on active duty and members of the Selected
Reserve (SELRES) will be afforded the opportunity to complete their high school education
through a State-funded or Service component sponsored program; earn an equivalency diploma,
improve their academic skills or level of literacy, enroll in career and technical education
schools, receive college credit for military training and experience in accordance with the
American Council on Education (ACE) Guide to the Evaluation of Educational Experiences in
the Armed Services (Reference (e), take tests to earn college credit, and enroll in postsecondary
education programs that lead to industry-recognized credentials, and undergraduate and graduate
degrees.

    b. Service members’ costs to participate in the DoD Voluntary Education Program as
authorized by section 2007 of Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C) (Reference (f)), will be
reduced through financial support, including TA that is administered uniformly across the
Military Services. On an annual basis and no later than the end of second quarter of the fiscal
year, the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), in coordination
with the Military Departments, will review the uniform semester-hour (or equivalent) TA caps
and annual TA ceilings to determine possible changes for the upcoming fiscal year. If there are
any changes in the uniform semester-hour (or equivalent) caps and annual TA ceilings, a
memorandum will be released from the USD(P&R), in coordination with the Military
Departments, and a corresponding notice will be published in the Federal Register.

   c. Professional education counseling will be readily available and easy to access so that
Service members can make informed decisions concerning available educational opportunities


Change 4, 04/02/2020                              2
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


and benefits. Education counseling will be provided by a qualified professional (Education
Services Series 1740 or an individual with equivalent qualifications) in sufficient numbers to
operate voluntary education programs as determined by individual Service standards.

   d. In accordance with Executive Order (E.O.) 13607 (Reference (g)):

       (1) Educational institutions receiving funding from federal military educational benefits
programs, such as the DoD TA Program, will:

            (a) Provide meaningful information to students on the financial cost and attendance
at an educational institution so military students can make informed decisions on where to attend
school as stated in section 3 of Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

            (b) Prevent unfair, deceptive, and abusive recruiting practices that target Service
members (as defined by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act) and
as stated in section 3 of Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

          (c) Provide academic and student support services specific to the institutions’
programs to enrolled Service members, spouses, and adult family members.

       (2) DoD will develop a centralized online complaint system for Service members,
spouses, and adult family members that will register, track, and respond to student complaints.
DoD or the assigned Military Service will work with educational institutions to resolve any filed
complaints. Educational institutions having recurring, substantive complaints or demonstrating
an unwillingness to resolve complaints may face a range of penalties from a directed Third Party
Education Assessment to revocation of the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU and
removal from participation in the DoD TA Program. As appropriate, DoD will refer student
complaints to other government agencies/regulators including but not limited to the Federal
Trade Commission (FTC), Department of Justice (DOJ), Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB), Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and Department of Education (ED).

   e. Educational institutions accredited by a national or regional accrediting agency recognized
by ED will be encouraged to provide degree programs on DoD installations and the Military
Services will facilitate their operations on the DoD installations referred to in section 3 of
Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

    f. To the extent that space is otherwise available, eligible adult family members of Service
members, DoD civilian employees and their eligible adult family members, and military retirees
may enroll in postsecondary education programs offered on a DoD installation at no cost to the
individual Service TA programs.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                             3
                                                                 DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011



6. INFORMATION COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS. The DoD Postsecondary Education
Complaint Intake, referred to in paragraph 5l of Enclosure 2 and paragraphs 6c(5)(h) and
6c(9)(d) of Enclosure 3 of this instruction, has been assigned Office of Management and Budget
control number 0704-0501 and report control symbol DD-P&R(AR)2536, in accordance with the
procedures in Directive-type Memorandum 12-004 (Reference (h)) and DoD Manual 8910.01
(Reference (i)).


7. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 4. The change to this issuance updates references and
organizational titles and removes expiration language in accordance with current Chief
Management Officer of the Department of Defense direction.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective March 15, 2011.




                                                Clifford L. Stanley
                                                Under Secretary of Defense for
                                                Personnel and Readiness

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 4, 04/02/2020                            4
                                                                                                 DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................7

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................8
  USD(P&R) .................................................................................................................................8
  ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR READINESS AND FORCE
     MANAGEMENT (ASD(R&FM)) .......................................................................................8
  DASD(MCFP) ...........................................................................................................................8
  ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE
     AFFAIRS (ASD(M&RA)) ..................................................................................................9
  SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS.......................................………...10
  SECRETARY OF THE NAVY ...............................................................................................12

ENCLOSURE 3: PROCEDURES ................................................................................................13

     TA FOR SERVICE MEMBERS PARTICIPATING IN EDUCATION
        PROGRAMS......................................................................................................................13
     GUIDELINES FOR ESTABLISHING, MAINTAINING, AND OPERATING
        VOLUNTARY EDUCATION PROGRAMS ...................................................................18
     PROCEDURES FOR THE RESPONSIBLE EDUCATION ADVISOR, ON BEHALF OF
        THE INSTALLATION COMMANDER, TO PROVIDE VOLUNTARY EDUCATION
        PROGRAMS AND SERVICES FROM POSTSECONDARY EDUCATIONAL
        INSTITUTIONS ................................................................................................................21
     REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES FOR EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
        SEEKING ACCESS TO THE DOD INSTALLATION SOLELY TO
        PROVIDE ACADEMIC COUNSELING OR STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES
        TO STUDENTS .................................................................................................................25
     INTERSERVICE VOLUNTARY EDUCATION BOARD ....................................................26
     DANTES ..................................................................................................................................27

     APPENDIX
       TEMPLATE OF DOD MOU BETWEEN DOD OFFICE OF THE USD(P&R)
          AND EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION AND SERVICE-SPECIFIC
          ADDENDUMS ............................................................................................................31

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................57

     PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................57
     PART II. DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................58

FIGURES

     1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
        Institution ...........................................................................................................................31



Change 4, 04/02/2020                                                    5                                                    CONTENTS
                                                                                              DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


   2. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the
      U.S. Air Force ....................................................................................................................48
   3. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the
      U.S. Army ..........................................................................................................................51
   4. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the
      U.S. Marine Corps .............................................................................................................53
   5. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the
      U.S. Navy ...........................................................................................................................54




Change 4, 04/02/2020                                                 6                                                   CONTENTS
                                                                          DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


                                             ENCLOSURE 1

                                              REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Instruction 1322.25, “Voluntary Education Programs,” February 5, 1997 (hereby
      cancelled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
      (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(c)   DoD Directive 1322.08E, “Voluntary Education Programs for Military Personnel,”
      January 3, 2005
(d)   DoD Instruction 1322.9, “Voluntary Education Programs for Military Personnel-
      Management Information System,” October 16, 1995 (hereby cancelled)
(e)   American Council on Education (ACE), “The Guide to the Evaluation of Educational
      Experiences in the Armed Services” 1
(f)   Title 10, United States Code
(g)   Executive Order 13607, “Establishing Principles of Excellence for Educational Institutions
      Serving Service Members, Veterans, Spouses, and Other Family Members,” April 27, 2012
(h)   Directive-type Memorandum 12-004, “DoD Internal Information Collections,” April 24,
      2012, as amended
(i)   DoD Manual 8910.01, “DoD Information Collections Manual,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(j)   DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
      Management Program,” July 10, 2009, as amended
(k)   Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support, “DANTES Examination Program
      Handbook (DEPH)”, April 1, 2010 2
(l)   DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(m)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Roadmap, “Defense Language Transformation Roadmap,”
      January 2005 3
(n)   Title IV of Public Law 89-329, “Higher Education Act of 1965,” November 8, 1965
(o)   Section 712 of title 14, United States Code
(p)   Section 303a(e) of title 37, United States Code
(q)   DoD Instruction 1344.07, “Personal Commercial Solicitation on DoD Installations,”
      March 30, 2006
(r)   DoD Instruction 1322.19, “Voluntary Education Programs in Overseas Areas,” March 14,
      2013
(s)   Part 600.9 of Title 34, Code of Federal Regulations
(t)   Section 1232g of Title 20, United States Code (also known as “The Family Educational
      Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)”)




1
  Available at http://www.acenet.edu/news-room/Pages/Military-Guide-Online.aspx
2
  Copies are available online at http://www.dantes.doded.mil/index.html
3
  Copies are available online at
http://www.defense.gov/news/Mar2005/d20050330roadmap.pdf



Change 4, 04/02/2020                                   7                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R) will:

   a. Monitor implementation of and ensure compliance with this Instruction and Reference (c).

   b. Establish rates of TA and ensure uniformity across the Military Services as required by
Reference (c) and this Instruction. The uniform semester-hour (or equivalent) TA caps and
annual TA ceilings will be reviewed annually and if changed, a memorandum from the
USD(P&R) will be released following coordination with each of the Military Departments.
Additionally, if the uniform TA rates are changed, a notice will be published in the Federal
Register at approximately the start of the fiscal year.

   c. Establish, under the provisions of DoDI 5105.18 (Reference (j)), the Interservice
Voluntary Education Board, which will be composed of full-time or permanent part-time Federal
employees.

   d. Maintain a program to assess the effectiveness of the voluntary education programs.

    e. Issue written supplemental guidance annually for the funding and operation of the
Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support (DANTES) for those items not
reflected in section 6 of Enclosure 3 of this instruction.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR READINESS AND FORCE
MANAGEMENT (ASD(R&FM)). The ASD(R&FM), under the authority, direction, and control
of the USD(P&R) will:

   a. Provide administrative assistance to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Military Community and Family Policy (DASD(MCFP)), in support of the voluntary education
programs.

   b. Respond to matters that are referred by the DASD(MCFP).


3. DASD(MCFP). The DASD(MCFP), under the authority, direction, and control of the
ASD(R&FM), will:

    a. Monitor compliance with this Instruction, Reference (c), and related issuances by
personnel under his or her authority, direction, and control.

   b. Oversee the DoD Voluntary Education Program.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                            8                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


   c. Provide ongoing and routine clarifying guidance for the DoD Voluntary Education
Program.

    d. Provide representatives to professional education and cross-agency panels addressing
issues impacting the DoD Voluntary Education Program, its regulatory scope, clientele, and
partners.

   e. Designate the Voluntary Education Chief within the Office of the DASD(MCFP) as the
Chair of the Interservice Voluntary Education Board and oversee implementation of Board and
DANTES procedures as detailed in Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

    f. Oversee the DoD Postsecondary Education Complaint System through which Service
members, spouses, and adult family members receiving federal military and veterans educational
benefits can register on-line complaints that will be tracked and responded to by DoD, VA, ED,
CFPB, DOJ, FTC, and other relevant agencies. The DoD Postsecondary Education Complaint
System is web-based and accessible on-line at https://afaems.langley.af.mil/pecs/DoDPECS.
This complaint system contains the uniform procedures for the processing of the complaint
intake (electronic DD Form 2961, “DoD Postsecondary Education Complaint Intake”).

    g. Oversee the Third-Party Education Assessment, which is a third party review process to
assess the quality, delivery, and coordination of the voluntary education programs provided to
military personnel on the installation, in the community, and via distance learning (DL). It
assists in improving the quality of the delivery of these programs through recommendation to
educational institutions, DoD installations, and the Military Services. DASD(MCFP) will
monitor actions:

        (1) By the Military Services to resolve recommendations for improvement identified on
the respective Military Service's installation during the Third Party Education Assessment.

        (2) By the DoD Voluntary Education Chief to resolve recommendations for
improvement concerning educational institutions operating off the DoD installation or via DL
identified during Third Party Education Assessments. These educational institutions will provide
corrective actions taken within 6 months of the assessment to the DoD Voluntary Education
Chief. In instances when the issue cannot be resolved within the 6 month timeframe, the
educational institution will submit a status report every 3 months to the DoD Voluntary
Education Chief until the recommendation is resolved.

    h. Prepare written supplemental guidance annually for the USD(P&R) regarding the funding
and operation of DANTES for those items not reflected in section 6 of Enclosure 3 of this
instruction.

   i. Oversee the policy of the JST.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                            9                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


4. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
(ASD(M&RA)). The ASD(M&RA), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), will:

    a. Monitor compliance with this Instruction, Reference (c), and related issuances by
personnel under his or her authority, direction, and control.

   b. Appoint a representative to serve on the Interservice Voluntary Education Board.

    c. Arrange the assignment of, on a rotating basis, a field-grade officer, to serve as the
Reserve Component (RC) Advisor to the Voluntary Education Chief and a representative on the
Interservice Voluntary Education Board.


5. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments will:

    a. Monitor compliance with this Instruction, Reference (c), and related issuances by
personnel under their respective authority, direction, and control.

    b. Establish, maintain, coordinate, and operate voluntary education programs that encompass
a broad range of educational experiences including, but not limited to, academic skills
development, high school completion programs, career and technical education programs, and
programs leading to the award of industry-recognized credentials, and undergraduate and
graduate degrees.

   c. Require that sufficient funding is available to provide Service members with TA support
consistent with the requirements in Enclosure 3 of this Instruction.

    d. Require that educational counseling is available to Service members so they will have
sufficient information and guidance to plan an appropriate program of study. Educational
counseling will be provided by a qualified professional (Education Services Series 1740 or an
individual with equivalent qualifications).

    e. Require that voluntary education programs participate in the DoD-established third-party
review process (titled the Third Party Education Assessment).

       (1) Within 6 months of the Third Party Education Assessment on their installation, the
responsible Military Service will resolve recommendations received as a result of the assessment
and provide the resolutions to the DoD Voluntary Education Chief. In instances when the issue
cannot be resolved within the 6 month timeframe, the Military Service will submit a status report
every 3 months to the DoD Voluntary Education Chief until the recommendation is resolved.

       (2) If the recommendation(s) requires involvement of an educational institution
providing educational services to an installation, the respective Military Service will coordinate
the submission of corrective actions taken by the educational institution(s) through the



Change 4, 04/02/2020                              10                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


appropriate Education Advisor and forward the submission through their Service leadership to
the DoD Voluntary Education Chief.

       (3) Waivers to the Third Party Education Assessment must be submitted to and approved
by the DoD Voluntary Education Chief.

    f. Provide one representative to serve on the Interservice Voluntary Education Board
responsible for their Services’ voluntary education policy from each of the following Military
Services: Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps. Each Service representative’s
membership will be on a permanent basis and changed only when their voluntary education
policy position is changed.

    g. Assign, on a rotating basis, a senior enlisted Service member in the military pay grade E-9
to serve as the DANTES enlisted advisor.

   h. Assign, on a rotating basis, a field-grade officer to serve as the DANTES RC advisor.

   i. Require that military test control officers and test centers comply with the guidance and
procedures published in the DANTES Examination Program Handbook (Reference (k)).

    j. Require that personnel who provide counseling, advice, and program management related
to voluntary education programs have access to the DoD Voluntary Education homepage and
other websites so they can provide current and accurate information to Service members.

   k. Provide opportunities for Service members to access the Internet, where available, to
enroll in and complete postsecondary courses that are part of their approved evaluated
educational plan leading to an educational goal.

    l. Submit requested quarterly and annual information for the Voluntary Education
Management Information System (VEMIS) by the 20th day of the month after the end of each
fiscal quarter for the quarterly reports and November 15th each year for the annual report.
Reporting information includes, but is not limited to, voluntary education program data on
enrollments, participation, and costs.

    m. Respond to and resolve Service-specific student complaints received and managed
through the DoD Postsecondary Education Complaint System.

    n. Provide Service members with a JST. At a minimum, the JST will include documented
military student data, courses, and military occupations evaluated by ACE, including
descriptions, learning outcomes, and equivalent college credit recommendations, as well as
national college-level exam results. The U.S. Air Force (USAF) will continue to use the
Community College of the Air Force (CCAF) to document its members’ academic and military
credit.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                             11                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


6. SECRETARY OF THE NAVY. The Secretary of the Navy, as the DoD Executive Agent
(EA) for DANTES pursuant to Reference (c) and DoDD 5101.1 (Reference (l)), and in addition
to the responsibilities in section 5 of this enclosure, will:

    a. Transmit supplemental annual guidance issued by the USD(P&R) to DANTES for those
items not reflected in section 6 of Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

    b. Require that the Director, DANTES, provide updates on DANTES plans, operations, and
activities to the USD(P&R).

    c. Through its civilian personnel system, advertise the position of Director, DANTES, when
the position is vacated and appoint the Director, DANTES, in accordance with the procedures
outlined in Enclosure 3 of this Instruction.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                           12                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. TA FOR SERVICE MEMBERS PARTICIPATING IN EDUCATION PROGRAMS

    a. TA will be available for Service members participating in high school completion and
approved courses from accredited undergraduate or graduate education programs or educational
institutions. Approved courses are those that are part of an identified course of study leading to a
postsecondary certificate or degree and non-degree oriented language courses integral to the
Defense Language Transformation Roadmap (Reference (m)).

      (1) Use of TA for non-degree oriented language courses is limited to those published by
the USD(P&R) on the DoD Strategic Language List.

       (2) Dominant-in-the-force languages and languages deemed by the DoD as already
having sufficient strategic capacity will not be funded under section 2007 of Reference (f),
except for assignments outside the continental United States.

   b. TA will be applied as follows:

       (1) For 100 percent of the cost of approved high school completion programs for Service
members who have not been awarded a high school or equivalency diploma and who are
enrolled in such programs.

         (2) In support of the voluntary education of active duty Service members during their
off-duty periods, each Military Service will pay all or a portion, as specified in subparagraphs
1.b.(2)(a) through 1.b.(2)(g) of this enclosure, of the charges of an educational institution for
education during the member’s off-duty periods. TA funding will only be paid to educational
institutions accredited by an accrediting organization recognized by ED, approved for VA
funding, and certified to participate in federal student aid programs through the ED under Title
IV of Public Law 89-329, also known and referred to in this instruction as the Higher Education
Act of 1965 (Reference (n)). Whenever ED withdraws the recognition of any accrediting
agency, an institution of higher education that meets the requirements of accreditation,
eligibility, and certification on the day before such withdrawal, may, notwithstanding the
withdrawal, continue to participate in the TA program for a period not to exceed 18 months from
the date of the withdrawal of recognition.

            (a) When an educational institution’s charges are equal to or less than the established
cap per semester-hour of credit or its equivalent, the responsible Service will pay the entire
amount charged by the educational institution. In computing credit equivalency, the following
conversions will apply: 1 quarter-hour credit = 2/3 semester-hour credit; and 45 contact hours
will be considered equivalent to 1 semester-hour credit when neither semester- nor quarter-hours
are specified for the education for which the Service member is enrolled.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              13                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


           (b) When an educational institution’s charges exceed the established cap per
semester-hour of credit, or its equivalent, the responsible Service will pay no more than the
established cap per semester-unit (or equivalent) for tuition.

          (c) Each Service member participating in off-duty, voluntary education will be
allowed no more than the established annual ceiling, in aggregate, for each fiscal year.

            (d) Covered charges include those that are submitted to the Service by the
educational institution for tuition only. Educational institutions that bundle tuition, fees, or
books into a consolidated cost, must detail the charges of fees and books separately for Service
members participating in the TA program. Fees include any charge not directly related to course
instruction including but not limited to costs associated with room, board, distance learning,
equipment, supplies, books/materials, exams, insurance, parking, transportation, admissions,
registration, or fines.

           (e) TA funds are not to be used for the purchase of books to include textbooks,
ebooks, CDs/DVDs, or reference or instructional materials. Additionally, institutional education
revenue generated from military TA funds cannot be used to support textbook grants or
scholarships.

           (f) To be eligible to receive TA, a Service member must meet the minimum
requirement of successfully completing basic training. RC members are exempt from the
requirement to first attend basic training before being authorized to receive TA. Additional
respective Service requirements must be met to include training qualification, unit assignment,
and time in service criteria.

        (3) The TA rate, credit cap, and annual per capita ceiling will be reviewed annually in
consideration of inflation and other effects, and will be applicable uniformly whether instruction
is delivered traditionally in-the-classroom or through distance education. Rates of TA other than
as identified in subparagraphs 1.b.(2)(a) through 1.b.(2)(f) of this enclosure are not authorized.

   c. Service-specific TA Eligibility Requirements

       (1) Service-specific eligibility criteria and management controls are determined by each
Military Service.

       (2) Service-specific TA eligibility criteria and management controls may include, but are
not limited to, applying TA:

          (a) For courses leading to a certificate or required for a credentialing program. All
payments for courses must comply with the allowable caps and ceilings.

         (b) For graduate studies through the master’s degree level. All payments for courses
must comply with the allowable caps and ceilings.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                             14                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


            (c) For same level degrees, subject to the availability of funds. However, TA is
primarily intended to raise the academic degree level of the Service member.

    d. TA is available to a commissioned officer on active duty, other than an officer serving in
the Ready Reserves (addressed in subparagraphs 1.e.(1) and 1.f.(1) of this Enclosure), only if the
officer agrees to remain on active duty for a period of at least 2 years after the completion of the
education or training for which TA was paid pursuant to section 2007 of Reference (f).

   e. The Secretary of the Military Department concerned may only make TA available to a
member of the SELRES, pursuant to section 2007 of Reference (f), under the following
conditions:

       (1) In the case of a commissioned officer, the officer must agree to remain a member of
the SELRES for at least 4 years after completion of the education or training for which TA is
paid.

        (2) In the case of an enlisted member, the Secretary concerned may require the member
of the SELRES to enter into an agreement to remain a member of the SELRES for up to 4 years
after completion of the education or training for which TA is paid.

   f. The Secretary of the Military Department concerned may only make TA available to a
member of the IRR who has a military occupational specialty designated by the Secretary
concerned, pursuant to section 2007 of Reference (f), and only under the following conditions:

       (1) In the case of a commissioned officer, the officer must agree to remain a member of
the SELRES or IRR for at least 4 years after completion of the education or training for which
TA was paid.

        (2) In the case of an enlisted member, the Secretary concerned may require the member
of the IRR to enter into an agreement to remain a member of the IRR for up to 4 years after
completion of the education or training for which TA is paid.

    g. Members performing Active Guard and Reserve (AGR) duty pursuant to section 12310 of
Reference (f) or active duty pursuant to section 712 of title 14, U.S.C. (Reference (o)) are
eligible for TA in accordance with paragraph 1.d. of this Enclosure.

   h. The Secretary of the Military Department concerned may make TA available to National
Guard members in accordance with paragraph 1.d. of this enclosure, except for National Guard
members assigned to the Inactive National Guard.

   i. Reimbursement and repayment requirements:

        (1) If a commissioned officer or member of the Ready Reserve does not fulfill a
specified Service obligation as required by section 2007 of Reference (f), they are subject to the
repayment provisions of section 303a(e) of title 37, U.S.C. (Reference (p)).




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              15                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


        (2) For other conditions pursuant to section 2005 of Reference (f), the Secretary
concerned may require a Service member to enter into a written agreement when providing
advanced education assistance. If the Service member does not fulfill any terms or conditions as
prescribed by the Secretary concerned, the Service member will be subject to the repayment
provisions of Reference (p).

       (3) Pursuant to Reference (p), the Secretary concerned may establish procedures for
determining the amount of the repayment required from the Service member and the
circumstances under which an exception to the required repayment may be granted.

        (4) Reimbursement will be required from the Service member if a successful course
completion is not obtained. For the purpose of reimbursement, a successful course completion is
defined as a grade of “C” or higher for undergraduate courses, a “B” or higher for graduate
courses, and a “Pass” for “Pass/Fail” grades. Reimbursement will also be required from the
Service member if he or she fails to make up a grade of “I” for incomplete within the time limits
stipulated by the educational institution or 6 months after the completion of the class, whichever
comes first. The Secretary of the Military Department will establish recoupment processes for
unsuccessful completion of courses.

    j. Students using TA must maintain a cumulative grade point average (GPA) of 2.0 or higher
after completing 15 semester hours, or equivalent, in undergraduate studies, or a GPA of 3.0 or
higher after completing 6 semester hours, or equivalent, in graduate studies, on a 4.0 grading
scale. If the GPA for TA funded courses falls below these minimum GPA limits, TA will not be
authorized and Service members will use alternative funding (such as financial aid or personal
funds) to enroll in courses to raise the cumulative GPA to 2.0 for undergraduate studies or 3.0 for
graduate studies.

    k. TA will not be authorized for any course for which a Service member receives
reimbursement in whole or in part from any other Federal source such as veterans’ education
benefits (GI Bill and other programs) and Service-funded programs (ROTC scholarship,
education-related incentive or bonus, and advanced civil schooling) when the payment would
constitute a duplication of benefits paid to that educational institution. Federal student aid loan,
grant, and work-study programs will not be considered a duplication of benefit. Educational
institutions have the responsibility to notify the Service if there is any duplication of benefits,
determine the amount of credit that should be returned, and credit the amount back to the
Service. The use of funds related to veterans’ education benefits to supplement TA received by
active duty and RC personnel is authorized in accordance with applicable VA guidelines.

    l. Pell Grants may be used in conjunction with TA assistance to pay that portion of tuition
costs not covered by TA.

   m. TA will be provided for courses provided by educational institutions awarding degrees
based on demonstrated competency, if:

       (1) Competency rates are equated to semester or quarter units of credit.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              16                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


          (2) The educational institution publishes traditional grade correlations with “Pass/Fail”
grades.

     (3) The educational institution provides a breakdown by course equivalent for Service
members.

    n. Enrollment in a professional practicum integral to these types of programs is also
authorized. However, normal DoD TA caps and ceilings apply; the cost of expanded levels of
enrollment over and above these enrollment levels and normal caps and ceilings must be borne
by the student.

    o. When used for postsecondary education, TA will be provided only for courses offered by
postsecondary educational institutions whose home campus is operating within the United States,
to include the District of Columbia and U.S. territories, which are accredited by a national or
regional accrediting body recognized by the ED.

    p. On a date to be determined, but not earlier than 60 days following the approved change to
this issuance and its publication in the Federal Register, to receive TA, all educational institution
home campuses must sign the revised DoD Voluntary Education Partnership Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) (see the Appendix to this enclosure), and the name of the educational
institution must be posted on the DoD MOU Website under the “Participating Institutions” tab
(located at http://www.dodmou.com). A single signed, revised DoD Voluntary Education
Partnership MOU with the educational institution’s home campus will cover any program
offered by the educational institution, regardless of location. The requirement to sign the revised
DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU contained in this issuance applies to institutions
with a previously approved and signed DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU posted on
the DoD MOU website. For information concerning requirements or compliance send a written
inquiry to osd.pentagon.ousd-p-r.mbx.vol-edu-compliance@mail.mil.

    q. To the extent that any provision of the standard language of the DoD Voluntary Education
Partnership MOU template in the appendix to this enclosure results from DoD policy that
conflicts with a state law or regulation, the DASD(MCFP) may authorize amending the standard
language of the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU template on a case-by-case basis to
the extent permissible by Federal law or regulation.

   r. A DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU with an educational institution may be
suspended or terminated by DoD in these circumstances:

        (1) The DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU with an educational institution may
be terminated by the ASD(R&FM) following written notice and an opportunity to respond for
the failure to comply with any element of this part of the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership
MOU. In addition, an otherwise qualified educational institution may be suspended from
participating in the tuition assistance program by the ASD(R&FM) following written notice and
an opportunity to respond through either the termination of an existing DoD Voluntary
Education Partnership MOU or the refusal by DoD to enter into a new DoD Voluntary Education
Partnership MOU upon indictment of the educational institution or any senior official of the



Change 4, 04/02/2020                               17                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


educational institution on a criminal charge related to the operation of the educational institution.
The decision of the ASD(R&FM) in either of these cases may be appealed to the USD(P&R),
and the decision of the USD(P&R) will be deemed to be the final administrative action by DoD
on the matter.

        (2) An otherwise qualified educational institution may also be immediately suspended
from participating in the tuition assistance program through either the termination of an existing
DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU or the refusal to enter into a new DoD Voluntary
Education Partnership MOU by the USD(P&R) on national security grounds. Written notice of
the action will be provided to the educational institution, and, if practicable without damaging
national security, the written notice will include a short unclassified summary of the reasons for
the action. Such a decision of the USD(P&R) is only appealable to the Secretary of Defense,
who has authorized the Deputy Secretary of Defense to act on such an appeal.

       (3) The authorities pursuant to this paragraph are not delegable.


2. GUIDELINES FOR ESTABLISHING, MAINTAINING, AND OPERATING
VOLUNTARY EDUCATION PROGRAMS

    a. Education programs established consistent with this Instruction by each Military Service
will:

       (1) Provide for the academic, technical, intellectual, personal, and professional
development of Service members, thereby contributing to the readiness of the Military Services
and the quality of life of Service members and their families.

        (2) Increase Service members’ opportunities for advancement and leadership by
reinforcing their academic skills and occupational competencies with new skills and knowledge.

        (3) Lead to a credential, such as a high school diploma, certificate, or college degree,
signifying satisfactory completion of the educational program.

       (4) Include an academic skills program, which allows personnel to upgrade their reading,
writing, computation, and communication abilities in support of academic skills and military
occupations and careers. Academic skills programs may include English as a second language
and basic science.

        (5) Include programs and college offerings that support findings from periodic needs
assessments conducted by the appropriate DoD installation official (normally the Education
Services Officer (ESO)) for programs provided on the DoD installation. The DoD installation
needs assessment process is used to determine such items as staffing requirements, course
offerings, size of facilities, funding, or other standards for delivery of educational programs.
Duplication of course offerings on a DoD installation should be avoided. However, the
availability of similar courses through correspondence or electronic delivery will not be
considered duplication.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                              18                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011



       (6) Be described in a publication or online source that includes on-installation
educational programs, programs available at nearby DoD installations, and colleges and
universities near the DoD installation.

   b. Each Military Service, in cooperation with community educational service providers, will
provide support essential to operating effective education programs. This support includes:

       (1) Adequate funds for program implementation, administration, and TA.

        (2) Adequately trained staff to determine program needs, counsel students, provide
testing services, and procure educational programs and services. Education counseling will be
provided by a qualified professional (Education Services Series 1740 or an individual with
equivalent qualifications).

       (3) Adequate and appropriate classroom, laboratory, and office facilities and equipment,
including computers to support local needs.

        (4) Access to telecommunications networks, computers, and physical or online libraries
at times convenient to active duty personnel.

   c. In operating its programs, each Military Service will:

        (1) Provide to newly assigned personnel, as part of their orientation to each new DoD
installation, or unit of assignment for RC personnel, information about voluntary education
programs available at that DoD installation, unit, or State for RC personnel.

       (2) Maintain participants’ educational records showing education accomplishments and
educational goals.

       (3) Provide for the continuing professional development of their education services staff,
including the participation of field staff in professional, as well as Service-sponsored,
conferences, symposiums, and workshops.

         (4) Provide educational services, including TA counseling, academic advice, and testing
to their personnel and to personnel of other Services (including the U.S. Coast Guard when
operating as a service in the Navy) who are assigned for duty at DoD installations of the host
Service. These educational services will be provided by a qualified professional (Education
Services Series 1740 or an individual with equivalent qualifications) in sufficient numbers to
operate voluntary education programs as determined by individual Service standards. Outcomes
from these educational services will include:

           (a) A prior learning assessment that includes a review of all education transcripts to
include the JST, the CCAF transcript, and academic transcript recommendations for ACE
recommended credit.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                             19                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


          (b) An assessment of the Service members’ readiness to accomplish the degree
requirements as outlined in the evaluated educational plan and a discussion of academic skills
development programs.

          (c) Discussion and review of technical credentials that can be obtained concurrent to
academic pursuits.

           (d) Discussion of credit-by-examination options.

           (e) Review of academic program options, leading to a degree plan.

             (f) Discussion with prospective military students on payment options and the use of
education benefits for postsecondary courses to include the DoD TA Program, VA education
benefit programs, State and federal grants and loans, commercial lending, and out-of-pocket
costs for the Service member. Discussion will include streamlined tools and information to
compare educational institutions using key measures of affordability and value through the VA
eBenefits portal at http://www.ebenefits.va.gov. The eBenefits portal is updated by the VA to
facilitate access to school performance information and key federal financial aid documents.

        (5) Continually assess the state of its voluntary education programs and periodically
conduct a formal needs assessment by the appropriate DoD installation official (normally the
ESO) to ensure that the best possible programs are available to their members at each DoD
installation or in their State or area command for RC personnel. It is essential that a formal
needs assessment be conducted if there is a significant change in the demographic profile of the
DoD installation population.

    d. Eligible adult family members of Service members, DoD civilian employees and their
eligible adult family members, and military retirees may participate in installation postsecondary
education programs on a space-available basis at no cost to the individual Service TA programs.

    e. At locations where an educational program that is offered on a DoD installation is not
otherwise conveniently available outside the DoD installation, civilians who are not directly
employed by the Department of Defense or other Federal agencies, and who are not eligible adult
family members of DoD personnel, may be allowed to participate in DoD installation
educational programs. While such participation contributes to positive community relations,
participation must be on a student-funded, space-available basis at no cost to the individual
Service TA programs, after the registration of Service members, DoD civilian employees,
eligible adult family members, and military retirees. Additionally, a review of these potential
participants by the relevant DoD installation ethics counselor may be required as part of the
installation commander’s access requirements. Participation may also be subject to the terms of
status-of-forces or other regulating agreements.

    f. Education centers will maintain liaison with appropriate State planning and approving
agencies and coordinating councils to ensure that planning agencies for continuing, adult, or
postsecondary education are aware of the educational needs of military personnel located within
their jurisdiction.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                             20                              ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011



   g. In supporting a high school completion program, each Military Service will:

       (1) Ensure that all Service members with less than a high school education have the
opportunity to attain a high school diploma or its equivalent.

         (2) Ensure that neither a Military Service nor DANTES issues a certificate or similar
document to Service members based on performance on high school equivalency tests. Military
Services will recognize attainment of high school completion or equivalency only after a State-
or territory-approved agency has awarded the appropriate credential.

        (3) Pay 100 percent of the cost of high school equivalency instruction or proficiency
testing and credentialing for Service members.

         (4) Ensure that Service sponsored high school diploma programs are delivered by
institutions that are State-funded or a Service component program accredited by a regional
accrediting body or recognized by a State’s secondary school authority.


3. PROCEDURES FOR THE RESPONSIBLE EDUCATION ADVISOR, ON BEHALF OF
THE INSTALLATION COMMANDER, TO PROVIDE VOLUNTARY EDUCATION
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES FROM POSTSECONDARY EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS

    a. Contacts by an educational institution with a Service member for the purpose of asking or
encouraging the member to sign up for one of the educational institution’s programs (assuming
the program has some cost) are considered personal commercial solicitations. The responsible
education advisor will ensure educational institutions comply with DoDI 1344.07 (Reference (q))
and all requirements established by the installation commander for solicitation. Materials
available through the education center that provide basic information about the educational
institution or its programs or services in compliance with this MOU will not be considered
personal commercial solicitation including, but not limited to, brochures, flyers, and catalogs
provided by the educational institution. The responsible education advisor will ensure adequate
and appropriate materials are available at no cost to the Service member and at no additional
charge to the educational institution meeting the requirements as stated in the policy section of
this part and in compliance with the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU.

    b. The responsible installation education advisor will limit DoD installation access to
educational institutions or their agents meeting the requirements as stated in the policy section of
this instruction and in compliance with the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU. Agents
representing education institutions in the performance of contracted services are permitted DoD
installation access only in accordance with the requirements of their contract and/or agreement.

   c. Educational institutions interested in providing education, guidance, training
opportunities, and participating in sanctioned education fairs on a DoD installation will provide




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              21                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


their requests to the responsible education advisor, who will review and analyze these requests
on behalf of the installation commander.

    d. The responsible education advisor will ensure all educational institutions and its agents
granted access to DoD installations to provide education, guidance, training opportunities, and
participate in sanctioned education fairs to Service members:

       (1) Adhere to federal law, Reference (q), DoDI 1322.19 (Reference (r)), and the
cognizant Military Service’s policies and regulations.

        (2) Comply with applicable DoD installation policies and procedures designated by the
installation commander on such matters as fire and safety, environment, physical security,
personnel background checks, vehicle inspection and registration, and any other applicable
statues or regulations designated by the installation commander.

   e. Monitor educational institutions and its agents granted access to a DoD installation to
ensure they do not:

       (1) Use unfair, deceptive, abusive or fraudulent devices, schemes, or artifices, including
misleading advertising or sales literature.

        (2) Engage in unfair, deceptive, or abusive marketing tactics, such as during unit
briefings or assemblies; engaging in open recruiting efforts; or distributing marketing materials
on the DoD installation at unapproved locations or events.

       (3) Market to or recruit newly assigned military personnel to the DoD installation, unless
the Service member has received information about voluntary education programs and
educational services available at that DoD installation, to include TA, from their education
services staff or as part of their orientation to the new DoD installation.

    f. Ensure educational institutions granted access to DoD installations to provide programs,
services, or education guidance to their students meet these criteria:

       (1) Have a signed Voluntary Education Partnership MOU with DoD.

        (2) Are in compliance with State authorization requirements consistent with regulations
issued by ED including part 600.9 of Title 34, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (s)).
Educational institutions must meet the requirements of the State where services will be rendered
to include compliance with all State laws as they relate to distance education.

        (3) Are State approved for the use of veterans’ education benefits. Copies of the
certification will be filed with the appropriate State approving agency for the military student or
veteran.

        (4) Are certified to participate in federal student aid programs through the ED under
Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965. Title IV certification may be provisional so long



Change 4, 04/02/2020                              22                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                       DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


as the educational institution maintains eligibility to participate in the Federal Direct Loan
Program.

       (5) Are accredited by a national or regional accrediting body recognized by the ED and
conduct programs only from among those offered or authorized by the main administrative and
academic office in accordance with standard procedures for authorization of degree programs by
the educational institution.

   g. DoD installations seeking an educational institution to provide on-installation education
programs, through the responsible education advisor, must:

        (1) Communicate the educational needs of the DoD installation to a wide variety of
potential providers.

       (2) Seek favorable tuition rates, student services, and instructional support from
providers.

          (3) Provide to interested providers:

             (a) The level of services and instruction desired, and specific degree programs being
sought.

            (b) A demographic profile of the DoD installation population and probable volume
of participation in the program.

             (c) Facilities and level of security at no charge to the educational institution.

          (d) Cost associated with equipment and supporting services provided at the discretion
of the DoD installation.

             (e) A copy of this instruction.

             (f) Special requirements, such as:

               1. Format (e.g., distance, evening, or weekend classes), independent study, short
seminar, or other mode of delivery of instruction.

                 2. Unique scheduling problems related to the operational mission of the DoD
installation.

                3. Any DoD installation restrictions, limitations, or special considerations
relevant to using an alternate delivery system (e.g., DL).

                 4. Available computer hardware and supporting equipment.

                 5. Electrical, satellite, and network capabilities at the site.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                                 23                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011



   h. In evaluating proposals, responsible education advisors must ensure potential providers
meet, at a minimum, these criteria:

       (1) Programs satisfy objectives defined by the most recent needs assessment.

       (2) Programs, courses, and completion requirements are the same as those at the
provider’s main administrative and academic campus.

         (3) The educational institution granting undergraduate academic credit must adhere to
the Service members Opportunity Colleges (SOC) Principles and Criteria (available at
http://www.soc.aascu.org/socconsortium/PublicationsSOC.html) regarding the transferability of
credit, the awarding of credit for military training and experience, and residency requirements.

       (4) The provider is prepared to:

             (a) Offer academic counseling and flexibility in accommodating special military
schedules.

           (b) Ensure main administrative and academic office approval in faculty selection,
assignment, and orientation; and participation in monitoring and evaluation of programs.
Adjunct or part-time faculty will possess comparable qualifications as full-time permanent
faculty members.

            (c) Conduct on-installation or online courses that carry identical credit values,
represent the same content and experience, and use the same student evaluation procedures as
courses offered through the main administrative and academic campus. All substantive course
change requirements must follow the schools accreditation agencies requirements. If the
educational institution’s accrediting agency’s substantive change policy requires new courses or
program offerings to be submitted to the agency for approval, the educational institution will be
required to submit such items for approval before admitting Service members using military TA.

           (d) Maintain the same admission and graduation standards that exist for the same
programs at the main administrative and academic office, and include credits from courses taken
at a branch or auxiliary campus of the same educational institution in establishing academic
residency to meet degree requirements.

            (e) Provide library and other reference and research resources, in either print or
electronic format, that are appropriate and necessary to support course offerings.

            (f) Establish procedures to maintain regular communication among central
institutional academic leadership and administrators, and off-campus representatives and faculty.
Any educational institution’s proposal must specify these procedures.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              24                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


            (g) Provide students with regular and accessible academic and financial counseling
services either electronically or in-person. At a minimum, this includes Title IV and VA
education benefits.

           (h) Charge tuition that is not more than tuition charged to nonmilitary students.

            (i) Have established policies for awarding credit for military training by
examinations, experiential learning, and courses completed using modes of delivery other than
instructor-delivered, on-site classroom instruction.

           (j) Conduct programs only from among those offered or authorized by the main
administrative and academic office in accordance with standard procedures for authorization of
degree programs by the educational institution.


4. REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES FOR EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
SEEKING ACCESS TO THE DOD INSTALLATION SOLELY TO PROVIDE ACADEMIC
COUNSELING OR STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES TO STUDENTS

   a. Educational institutions must meet the criteria in paragraphs 3f(1) through 3f(5) of this
enclosure.

    b. Educational institutions must have a DoD installation student population of at least 20
military students, except in overseas locations covered by Reference (r). For this exception, only
contracted educational institutions are permitted on overseas DoD installations. Educational
institutions may submit eligible Title IV and GI Bill recipients (military or family member) to
supplement military TA recipients in meeting the minimum requirement.

    c. Educational institutions must request access through the responsible education advisor via
a written proposal. If a request is received from an educational institution seeking access to a
joint DoD installation, the responsible education advisor from the education center will
determine the appropriate Military Service to work the request. The request should include as a
minimum:

       (1) Educational institution name and intent or purpose of the visit.

       (2) Number and names of educational institution representatives that will be available.

       (3) Counseling delivery method: by appointment or walk-in.

       (4) Communication process used to inform students of their availability for counseling.

    d. The responsible education advisor will review and analyze the request on behalf of the
installation commander. The installation commander has the final authority to approve, deny,
suspend, or withdraw DoD installation access permission from an educational institution, as
deemed appropriate.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                             25                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011



    e. If a request is received from an educational institution seeking access to a DoD
installation, the responsible education advisor will:

        (1) Fully consider requests from those educational institutions complying with
requirements as stated in paragraphs 4a through 4c of this enclosure and be consistent in
treatment of educational institutions in accordance with this instruction. Also, consider the value
to the Service member as it relates to geographic location, accessibility and mission tempo.

       (2) If a request is denied, provide a timely response to the educational institution and
inform the educational institution they may reapply for access once reasons for denial are
addressed.

      (3) Maintain copies of all correspondence in accordance with the DoD installation
records management schedule and disposition, with a minimum time requirement of 2 years.

    f. If a DoD installation grants access to an educational institution to provide guidance to
their students, the educational institution and its agents will:

        (1) Only advise or counsel students at the education center or at a location approved by
the responsible education advisor.

        (2) Maintain a record of students counseled and provide a copy to the education office.
The record will annotate the type of program and the status of the Service member (current or
reenrollment).

        (3) Comply with applicable DoD installation policies and procedures designated by the
installation commander on such matters as fire and safety, environment, physical security,
personnel background checks, vehicle inspection and registration, and any other applicable
statues or regulations designated by the installation commander.


5. INTERSERVICE VOLUNTARY EDUCATION BOARD. Under the direction of the
Voluntary Education Chief, the Interservice Voluntary Education Board is composed of full-time
or permanent part-time employees of DoD or military members, and consists of one
representative responsible for policy from the Office of the ASD(M&RA), and the senior
voluntary education advisor responsible for policy each from the Army, Navy, Air Force, and
Marine Corps. The Director, DANTES, will serve as an ex-officio member. Meeting quarterly,
the Board will:

   a. Provide a forum for the exchange of information and discussion of issues related to
voluntary education programs.

   b. Develop recommendations for changes in policies and procedures.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              26                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


   c. Develop recommendations for DANTES activities and operations that support voluntary
education programs.

    d. Review and prioritize DANTES activities that support DoD voluntary education programs
to include budget execution and recommend execution year adjustments.

   e. Develop recommended policy and program guidance for DANTES for the Future-Year
Defense Program.


6. DANTES

    a. Guidance and recommendations for DANTES will be developed with the advice of the
Interservice Voluntary Education Board.

   b. The selection and rating of the Director, DANTES, will be as follows:

        (1) The DASD(MCFP) will convene and chair the search committee responsible for
replacing the Director, DANTES, when the position is vacated. At the request of the
USD(P&R), the Secretaries of the Military Departments will provide a senior manager to sit on
the search committee. The committee will recommend the best qualified candidate to the DoD
EA for DANTES for possible appointment as the Director, DANTES.

        (2) The DoD EA for DANTES will designate the rater of the Director, DANTES. The
Director, State Liaison and Educational Opportunity within the Office of the USD(P&R), MCFP,
will provide input to the DoD EA designated rater concerning the performance of the Director,
DANTES.

   c. DANTES will:

         (1) Support the Service voluntary education programs by executing the program outlined
in this Instruction and the annual USD(P&R) supplemental guidance for those items not reflected
in this section of this enclosure.

        (2) Provide execution information to the Interservice Voluntary Education Board
quarterly and provide information required to assist with the program objective memorandum
development as requested by the Board.

       (3) Support DoD off-duty, voluntary education programs and conduct special projects
and developmental activities in support of education-related DoD functions.

         (4) Assist the Military Services in providing high-quality and valuable educational
opportunities for Service members, their eligible adult family members, and DoD personnel, and
assist personnel in achieving professional and personal educational objectives. This role
includes the consolidated management of programs that prevent duplication of effort among the
Services. Through its activities, DANTES supports DoD recruitment, retention, and transition
efforts.


Change 4, 04/02/2020                           27                             ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011



       (5) Assume responsibilities and functions that include:

           (a) Managing and facilitating the delivery of a wide variety of examinations
including the General Equivalency Diploma test, college admissions, and credit-by-examination
programs.

          (b) Upon request, issuing transcripts for the United States Armed Forces Institute and
the examination and certification programs.

           (c) Managing the contract through which former DoD Dependents Schools students
can obtain copies of archived transcripts.

          (d) Managing the contract and functions related to the evaluation of educational
experiences in the Military Services that are covered by the contract.

           (e) Providing or developing and distributing educational materials, reference books,
counseling publications, educational software, and key educational resource information to
Defense Agencies and DoD installations.

            (f) Managing the SOC program contract and related functions.

           (g) Managing the DoD contract that provides for periodic third-party reviews of DoD
voluntary education programs titled the Third Party Education Assessment.

            (h) Managing the contract and data received on the voluntary education programs for
the VEMIS, which includes gathering, collating, and verifying participation and cost data from
the Services. Providing requisite consolidated reports to the USD(P&R). Requested data from
the Military Services on voluntary education programs is located and stored at
https://afaems.langley.af.mil/vemis. A user guide containing voluntary education program data
and report information for the Military Services and DANTES is also available at this website,
under the “Resources” tab.

            (i) Managing the DoD independent study catalog and its support systems, as
required.

          (j) Negotiating, administering, and coordinating contracts for DoD Worldwide
Education Symposiums in support of and in conjunction with the Interservice Voluntary
Education Board.

            (k) Establishing, refining, updating, and maintaining information on worldwide
education support of DoD off-duty, voluntary education programs on the Internet. Maintaining
necessary infrastructure to ensure that information on the Internet is always current and available
to leadership, agency personnel, the public, and others.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                             28                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


           (l) Administering the Troops-to-Teachers (TTT) Program in accordance with section
1154 of chapter 58 of Reference (f).

          (m) Monitoring new technological developments; providing reports, cost analyses,
and recommendations on educational innovations; and conducting special projects requested by
DoD and the Services, approved by the Interservice Voluntary Education Board, and as reflected
and approved in DANTES annual policy guidance.

            (n) Conducting staff development training on DANTES policies, procedures, and
practices related to voluntary education testing programs, and providing additional training as
requested by OSD and the Services.

        (o) Serving as the Defense Media Activity’s point of contact for information on
DANTES programs for military personnel.

           (p) Providing support, as requested, to DoD and Service Quality of Life and
Transition support programs.

       (q) Providing other support in mission areas as directed by the USD(P&R) and
DASD(MCFP).

           (r) Managing DoD contingency Tri-Service contracts, which provide educational
opportunities for deployed Service members with guidance and oversight from the DoD
Voluntary Education Chief.

            (s) Monitoring and maintaining liaison with the office responsible for consolidating
and distributing the JST for the Services.

       (6) Maintain liaison with education services officials of the Military Services, and
appropriate Federal and State agencies and educational associations, in matters related to the
DANTES mission and assigned functions.

       (7) Serve on panels and working groups designated by the DASD(MCFP).

        (8) Serve as the Executive Secretary at the Interservice Voluntary Education Board
meeting convened annually to review DANTES programs and to develop recommendations for
inclusion in annual guidance for DANTES. In this role, the Director, DANTES, will coordinate
the meeting, prepare the agenda, review and analyze DANTES programs and initiatives outlined
in the prior year’s operational plan, and provide minutes after the meeting.

      (9) Assist the Military Services in screening candidates for the DANTES Senior Enlisted
Advisor and DANTES RC Advisor positions.

      (10) Maintain the repository for the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOUs
between the USD(P&R) and partner educational institutions, to include Service-specific




Change 4, 04/02/2020                             29                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


addendums (see the Appendix to this enclosure for the template of the DoD Voluntary Education
Partnership MOU). DANTES will:

           (a) Administer and update the system that is the repository of the MOUs per
guidance from the USD(P&R).

          (b) Create, track, and maintain a centrally managed database for all signed
documents.

           (c) Publish an Internet-based list of all educational institutions that have a signed
partnership DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU.

          (d) Generate reports in accordance with guidance from the USD(P&R) and
procedures in References (h) and (i).

       (10) Provide data analyses and generate reports required by the Department of Defense
and the Interservice Voluntary Education Board as needed.

Appendix
   Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational Institution
and Service-Specific Addendums




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              30                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


                               APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3

      TEMPLATE OF DOD MOU BETWEEN DOD OFFICE OF THE USD(P&R) AND
        EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION AND SERVICE-SPECIFIC ADDENDUMS


  Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                    Institution


                   DoD VOLUNTARY EDUCATION PARTNERSHIP
                   MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU)
                                  BETWEEN
              DoD OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR
                     PERSONNEL AND READINESS (USD(P&R))
                                    AND
                      [NAME OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION]


1. PREAMBLE

    a. Providing access to quality postsecondary education opportunities is a strategic
investment that enhances the U.S. Service member’s ability to support mission accomplishment
and successfully return to civilian life. A forward-leaning, lifelong learning environment is
fundamental to the maintenance of a mentally powerful and adaptive leadership-ready force.
Today’s fast-paced and highly mobile environment, where frequent deployments and
mobilizations are required to support the Nation’s policies and objectives, requires the DoD to
sponsor postsecondary educational programs using a variety of learning modalities that include
instructor-led courses offered both on- and off-installation as well as distance learning (DL)
options. All are designed to support the professional and personal development and progress of
Service members and the DoD civilian workforce.

    b. Making these postsecondary programs available to the military community as a whole
further provides Service members, their eligible adult family members, DoD civilian employees,
and military retirees ways to advance their personal education and career aspirations and
prepares them for future career and technical pursuits, both inside and outside of the Department
of Defense. This helps strengthen the Nation by producing a well-educated citizenry and ensures
the availability of a significant quality-of-life asset that enhances recruitment and retention
efforts in an all-volunteer force.

2. PURPOSE

    a. This MOU articulates the commitment and agreement educational institutions provide to
the Department of Defense by accepting funds via each Service’s tuition assistance (TA)
program in exchange for education services.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                            31             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
    b. This MOU is not an obligation of funds, guarantee of program enrollments by DoD
personnel, their eligible adult family members, DoD civilian employees, or retirees in an
educational institution’s academic programs, or a guarantee for DoD installation access.

   c. This MOU covers courses delivered by educational institutions through all modalities.
These include, but are not limited to, classroom instruction, distance education (e.g., Web-based,
CD-ROM, or multimedia) and correspondence courses.

   d. This MOU includes high school programs, academic skills programs, and adult education
programs for military personnel and their eligible adult family members.

   e. This MOU articulates regulatory and governing directives and instructions:

        (1) Eligibility of DoD recipients is governed by federal law, DoD Instruction (DoDI)
1322.25, DoD Directive 1322.08E, and the cognizant Military Service’s policies, regulations, and
fiscal constraints.

        (2) Postsecondary educational programs provided to Service members using TA on DoD
installations outside of the United States will be operated in accordance with guidance from DoDI
1322.25; DoDI 1322.19; section 1212 of Public Law 99-145, as amended by section 518 of Public
Law 101-189; and under the terms of the Tri-Services contract currently in effect.

    f. This MOU is subject at all times to Federal law and the rules, guidelines, and regulations of
the Department of Defense. Any conflicts between this MOU and such Federal law, rules,
guidelines, and regulations will be resolved in favor of the Federal law, rules, guidelines, or
regulations.


3. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION (INCLUDING CERTIFICATE AND DEGREE GRANTING
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS) REQUIREMENTS FOR TA. Educational institutions must:

   a. Sign and adhere to the requirements of this MOU, including Service-specific addendums as
appropriate, prior to being eligible to receive TA payments.

     (1) Those educational institutions that have a current Voluntary Education Partnership
MOU with the Department of Defense will sign this MOU:

           (a) At the expiration of their current MOU (renewal);

            (b) At the request of the Department of Defense or the specific Military Service holding
a separate current MOU. The DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU (which includes the
Service-specific addendums) is required for an educational institution to participate in the DoD TA
Program. An “installation MOU” (which is separate from this MOU) is only required if an
educational institution is operating on a DoD installation. The installation MOU:


Change 4, 04/02/2020                             32              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued

               1. Contains the installation-unique requirements that the responsible education
advisor coordinated, documented, and retained; is approved by the appropriate Service voluntary
education representative; and is presented to the installation commander for final approval.

              2. Cannot conflict with the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU and
governing regulations.

         (2) Educational institutions must comply with this MOU and the requirements in Service-
specific addendums that do not conflict with governing Federal law and rules, guidelines, and
regulations, which include, but are not limited to, Title10 of the United States Code; DoD Directive
1322.08E, “Voluntary Education Programs for Military Personnel”; DoD Instruction 1322.25,
“Voluntary Education Programs”; DoDI 1322.19, “Voluntary Education Programs in Overseas
Areas”; and all DoD installation requirements imposed by the installation commander if the
educational institution has been approved to operate on a particular base. Educational institutions
failing to comply with the requirements set forth in this MOU may receive a letter of warning, be
denied the opportunity to establish new programs, have their MOU terminated, be removed from
the DoD installation, and may have the approval of the issuance of TA withdrawn by the Service
concerned.

    b. Be accredited by a national or regional accrediting agency recognized by ED, approved for
VA funding, and certified to participate in federal student aid programs through ED under Title IV
of the Higher Education Act of 1965.

   c. Comply with the regulatory guidance provided by the Department of Defense and the
Services.

    d. Comply with state authorization requirements consistent with regulations issued by ED,
including 34 C.F.R. 600.9. Educational institutions must meet all State laws as they relate to
distance education as required.

    e. Participate in the Third Party Education Assessment process when requested. This
requirement applies not only to educational institutions providing courses on DoD installations, but
also to those educational institutions that provide postsecondary instruction located off the DoD
installation or via DL. Educational institutions may be selected for Third Party Education
Assessment based on provider offerings (on-installation, off-installation, or DL), education benefits
received (large provider in terms of enrollments or TA funds), or an observed promising practice.
Educational institutions may also be selected as a result of reports of non-compliance with the DoD
Voluntary Education Partnership MOU, complaint(s) received, or negative information received
from other government agencies and regulators. Educational institutions demonstrating an
unwillingness to resolve findings may receive a range of penalties from a written warning to
revocation of the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU and removal from participation in
the DoD TA Program. As appropriate, Third Party Education Assessment findings will be shared
with other government agencies/regulators including but not limited to the CFPB, VA, ED, DOJ,


Change 4, 04/02/2020                             33             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
and FTC.

         (1) If an educational institution is operating on the DoD installation, the educational
institution will resolve the assessment report findings and provide corrective actions taken within 6
months of the Third Party Education Assessment to the responsible education advisor on the DoD
installation, the appropriate Service Voluntary Education Chief, and the DoD Voluntary Education
Chief.

       (2) If an educational institution is operating off the DoD installation or via DL, the
educational institution will resolve the assessment report findings and provide corrective actions
taken within 6 months of the Third Party Education Assessment to the DoD Voluntary Education
Chief.

        (3) In instances when the resolution action cannot be completed within the 6 month
timeframe, the educational institution will submit a status report every 3 months to the responsible
education advisor on the DoD installation if the educational institution is operating on the DoD
installation, and the DoD Voluntary Education Chief, until the recommendation is resolved.

    f. Before enrolling a Service member, provide each prospective military student with specific
information to locate, explain, and properly use the following ED and CFPB tools:

        (1) The College Scorecard which is a planning tool and resource to assist prospective
students and their families as they evaluate options in selecting a school and is located at:
http://collegecost.ed.gov/scorecard/.

         (2) The College Navigator which is a consumer tool that provides school information to
include tuition and fees, retention and graduation rates, use of financial aid, student loan default
rates and features a cost calculator and school comparison tool. The College Navigator is located
at: http://nces.ed.gov/collegenavigator/.

        (3) The Financial Aid Shopping Sheet which is a model aid award letter designed to
simplify the information that prospective students receive about costs and financial aid so they can
easily compare institutions and make informed decisions about where to attend school. The
Shopping Sheet can be accessed at: http://www2.ed.gov/policy/highered/guid/aid-offer/index.html.

        (4) The “Paying for College” webpage which can be used by prospective students to enter
the names of up to three schools and receive detailed financial information on each one and to enter
actual financial aid award information. The tool can be accessed at:
http://www.consumerfinance.gov/paying-for-college/.

    g. Designate a point of contact or office for academic and financial advising, including access
to disability counseling, to assist Service members with completion of studies and with job search
activities.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                              34             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
      (1) The designated person or office will serve as a point of contact for Service members
seeking information about available, appropriate academic counseling, financial aid counseling, and
student support services at the educational institution;

       (2) The point of contact will have a basic understanding of the military tuition assistance
program, ED Title IV funding, education benefits offered by the VA, and familiarity with
institutional services available to assist Service members.

       (3) The point of contact does not need to be exclusively dedicated to providing these
services and, as appropriate, may refer the Service member to other individuals with an ability to
provide these services, both on- and off-campus.

   h. Before offering, recommending, arranging, signing-up, dispersing, or enrolling Service
members for private student loans, provide Service members access to an institutional financial aid
advisor who will make available appropriate loan counseling, including, but not limited to:

       (1) Providing a clear and complete explanation of available financial aid, including Title IV
of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended.

      (2) Describing the differences between private and federal student loans to include terms,
conditions, repayment and forgiveness options.

      (3) Disclosing the educational institution’s student loan Cohort Default Rate (CDR), the
percentage of its students who borrow, and how its CDR compares to the national average. If the
educational institution’s CDR is greater than the national average CDR, it must disclose that
information and provide the student with loan repayment data.

      (4) Explaining that students have the ability to refuse all or borrow less than the maximum
student loan amount allowed.

   i. Have a readmissions policy for Service members that:

     (1) Allows Service members and reservists to be readmitted to a program if they are
temporarily unable to attend class or have to suspend their studies due to service requirements.

       (2) Follows the regulation released by ED (34 C.F.R. 668.8) regarding readmissions
requirements for returning Service members seeking readmission to a program that was interrupted
due to a Military service obligation, and apply those provisions to Service members that are
temporarily unable to attend classes for less than 30 days within a semester or similar enrollment
period due to a Military service obligation when such absence results in a withdrawal under
institution policies. A description of the provisions for U.S. Armed Forces members and their
families is provided in Chapter 3 of Volume 2 of the Federal Student Aid Handbook.

   j. Have policies in place compliant with program integrity requirements consistent with the


Change 4, 04/02/2020                             35              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
regulations issued by ED (34 C.F.R 668.71-668.75 and 668.14) related to restrictions on
misrepresentation, recruitment, and payment of incentive compensation. This applies to the
educational institution itself and its agents including third party lead generators, marketing firms, or
companies that own or operate the educational institution. As part of efforts to eliminate unfair,
deceptive, and abusive marketing aimed at Service members, educational institutions will:

        (1) Ban inducements, including any gratuity, favor, discount, entertainment, hospitality,
loan, transportation, lodging, meals, or other item having a monetary value of more than a de
minimis amount, to any individual or entity, or its agents including third party lead generators or
marketing firms other than salaries paid to employees or fees paid to contractors in conformity with
all applicable laws for the purpose of securing enrollments of Service members or obtaining access
to TA funds. Educational institution sponsored scholarships or grants and tuition reductions
available to military students are permissible

        (2) Refrain from providing any commission, bonus, or other incentive payment based
directly or indirectly on securing enrollments or federal financial aid (including TA funds) to any
persons or entities engaged in any student recruiting, admission activities, or making decisions
regarding the award of student financial assistance.

        (3) Refrain from high-pressure recruitment tactics such as making multiple unsolicited
contacts (3 or more), including contacts by phone, email, or in-person, and engaging in same-day
recruitment and registration for the purpose of securing Service member enrollments

   k. Refrain from automatic program renewals, bundling courses or enrollments. The student
and Military Service must approve each course enrollment before the start date of the class.

   l. The educational institution will obtain the approval of their accrediting agency for any new
course or program offering, provided such approval is required under the substantive change
requirements of the accrediting agency. Approval must be obtained before the enrollment of a
Service member into the new course or program offering

   m. If the educational institution is a member of the Service members Opportunity Colleges
(SOC), in addition to the requirements stated in paragraphs 3a through 3l of this DoD MOU, the
educational institution will:

        (1) Adhere to the SOC Principles, Criteria, and Military Student Bill of Rights (located at
http://www.soc.aascu.org/socconsortium/PublicationsSOC.html).

        (2) Provide processes to determine credit awards and learning acquired for specialized
military training and occupational experience when applicable to a Service member’s degree
program.

      (3) Recognize and use the ACE Guide to the Evaluation of Educational Experiences in the
Armed Services to determine the value of learning acquired in military service. Award credit for


Change 4, 04/02/2020                              36              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
appropriate learning acquired in military service at levels consistent with ACE Guide
recommendations and/or those transcripted by CCAF, when applicable to a Service member’s
program.

    n. If an institution is not a member of SOC, in addition to the requirements stated in paragraphs
3a through 3l of this MOU, the institution will:

       (1) Disclose its transfer credit policies and articulated credit transfer agreements before a
Service member’s enrollment. Disclosure will explain acceptance of credits in transfer is
determined by the educational institution to which the student wishes to transfer and refrain from
making unsubstantiated representations to students about acceptance of credits in transfer by
another institution.

            (a) If the educational institution accepts transfer credit from other accredited
educational institutions, then the institution agrees to evaluate these credits in conformity with the
principles set forth in the Joint Statement on the Transfer and Award of Credit developed by
members of the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers, the
American Council on Education, and the Council for Higher Education Accreditation. The
educational institution will then award appropriate credit, to the extent practicable within the
framework of its institutional mission and academic policies.

           (b) Decisions about the amount of transfer credit accepted, and how it will be applied to
the student’s program, will be left to the educational institution.

       (2) Disclose its policies on how they award academic credit for prior learning experiences,
including military training and experiential learning opportunities provided by the Military
Services, at or before a Service member’s enrollment.

           (a) In so far as the educational institution’s policies generally permit the award of credit
for comparable prior learning experiences, the educational institution agrees to evaluate the
learning experiences documented on the Service member’s official Service transcripts, and, if
appropriate, award credit.

           (b) The JST is an official education transcript tool for documenting the recommended
college credits for professional military education, training courses, and occupational experiences
of Service members across the Services. The JST incorporates data from documents such as the
Army/ACE Registry Transcript System, the Sailor/Marine ACE Registry Transcript System, the
Community College of the Air Force transcript, and the Coast Guard Institute transcript.

            (c) Decisions about the amount of experiential learning credit awarded, and how it will
be applied to the student’s program, will be left to the educational institution. Once an educational
institution has evaluated a particular military training or experiential learning opportunity for a
given program, the educational institution may rely on its prior evaluation to make future decisions
about awarding credit to Service members with the same military training and experience


Change 4, 04/02/2020                              37              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
documentation, provided that the course content has not changed.

       (3) If general policy permits, award transfer credit or credit for prior learning to:

           (a) Replace a required course within the major;

           (b) Apply as an optional course within the major;

           (c) Apply as a general elective;

           (d) Apply as a basic degree requirement; or

           (e) Waive a prerequisite.

       (4) Disclose to Service members any academic residency requirements pertaining to the
student’s program of study, including total and any final year or final semester residency
requirement at or before the time the student enrolls in the program.

       (5) Disclose basic information about the educational institution’s programs and costs,
including tuition and other charges to the Service member. This information will be made readily
accessible without requiring the Service member to disclose any personal or contact information.

        (6) Before enrollment, provide Service members with information on institutional
“drop/add,” withdrawal, and readmission policies and procedures to include information on the
potential impact of military duties (such as unanticipated deployments or mobilization, activation,
and temporary duty assignments) on the student’s academic standing and financial responsibilities.
For example, a Service member’s military duties may require relocation to an area where he or she
is unable to maintain consistent computer connectivity with the educational institution, which could
have implications for the Service member’s enrollment status. This information will also include
an explanation of the educational institution's grievance policy and process.

       (7) Conduct academic screening and competency testing; make course placement based on
student readiness.


4. TA PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS FOR EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS

    a. One Single Tuition Rate. All Service members attending the same educational institution, at
the same location, enrolled in the same course, will be charged the same tuition rate without regard
to their Service component. This single tuition rate includes active duty Service members and the
National Guard and Reservists who are activated under Title10 and using Title10 Military Tuition
Assistance, in order to assure that tuition rate distinctions are not made based on the Service
members’ branches of Service.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                              38              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
        (1) It is understood tuition rates may vary by mode of delivery (traditional or online), at the
differing degree levels and programs, and residency designations (in-state or out-of-state). Tuition
rates may also vary based on full-time or part-time status, daytime vs. evening classes, or
matriculation date, such as in the case of a guaranteed tuition program.

        (2) It is also understood that some States have mandated State rates for Guard and
Reservists within the State. (Those Guard and Reservists not activated on Title 10, U.S. Code
orders).

   b. Course Enrollment Information. The educational institutions will provide course enrollment,
course withdrawal, course cancellation, course completion or failure, grade, verification of degree
completion, and billing information to the TA issuing Service’s education office, as outlined in the
Service’s regulations and instructions.

        (1) Under section 1232g of title 20, United States Code (also known as “The Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act” and hereinafter referred to as “FERPA”) (Reference (u)), DoD
recognizes that educational institutions are required to obtain consent before sharing personally
identifiable non-directory information with a third party. Service members must authorize the
educational institutions to release and forward course enrollment information required in 4.b. to
DoD prior to approval of course enrollment using tuition assistance.

        (2) If an educational institution wants to ensure confidentiality during the transmission of
data to the third party, then the educational institution can contact the appropriate Service TA
management point of contact to discuss security and confidentiality concerns prior to transmitting
information.

   c. Degree Requirements and Evaluated Educational Plans

        (1) Educational institutions will disclose general degree requirements for the Service
member’s educational program (evaluated educational plan) to the member and his or her Service
before the enrollment of the Service member at the educational institution. These requirements,
typically articulated in the educational institution’s course catalog, should:

           (a) Include the total number of credits needed for graduation.

          (b) Divide the coursework students must complete in accordance with institutional
academic policies into general education, required, and elective courses.

            (c) Articulate any additional departmental or graduate academic requirements, such as
satisfying institutional and major field grade point average requirements, a passing grade in any
comprehensive exams, or completion of a thesis or dissertation.

       (2) In addition to providing degree requirements, the educational institution will provide to
Service members who have previous coursework from other accredited institutions and relevant


Change 4, 04/02/2020                              39              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
military training and experiential learning an evaluated educational plan that indicates how many, if
any, transfer credits it intends to award and how these will be applied toward the Service member’s
educational program. The evaluated educational plan will be provided within 60 days after
admission to the educational institution in which the individual has selected a degree program and
all required official transcripts have been received.

       (3) When a Service member changes his or her educational goal or major at the attending
school and the Service's education advisor approves the change, then the educational institution will
provide a new evaluated educational plan to the Service member and the Service within 60 days.
Only courses listed in the Service member’s evaluated educational plan will be approved for TA.

       (4) Degree requirements in effect at the time of each Service member’s enrollment will
remain in effect for a period of at least 1 year beyond the program’s standard length, provided the
Service member is in good academic standing and has been continuously enrolled or received an
approved academic leave of absence. Adjustments to degree requirements may be made as a result
of formal changes to academic policy pursuant to institutional or departmental determination,
provided that:

           (a) They go into effect at least 2 years after affected students have been notified; or

            (b) In instances when courses or programs are no longer available or changes have been
mandated by a State or accrediting body, the educational institution will identify low or no cost
solutions, working with affected Service members to identify substitutions that would not hinder
the student from graduating in a timely manner.

        (5) Degree requirements and evaluated educational plans will meet educational
requirements for credentialing in stated career field and graduates of a program will be eligible for
relevant professional license or certification. Educational institutions will disclose any conditions
(state or agency limitations) or additional requirements (training, experience, or exams) required to
obtain relevant credentials.

   d. Approved and TA Eligible Courses

         (1) Approved Courses. If an eligible Service member decides to use TA, educational
institutions will enroll him or her only after the TA is approved by the individual’s Service. Service
members will be solely responsible for all tuition costs without this prior approval. This
requirement does not prohibit an educational institution from pre-registering a Service member in a
course in order to secure a slot in the course. If a school enrolls the Service member before the
appropriate Service approves Military TA, then the Service member could be responsible for the
tuition. All Military TA must be requested and approved prior to the start date of the course. The
Military TA is approved on a course-by-course basis and only for the specific course(s) and class
dates that a Service member requests. If a military student “self-identifies” their eligibility and the
Service has not approved the funding, then the Service member will be solely responsible for all
tuition costs, not the Service.


Change 4, 04/02/2020                              40             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued

       (2) TA Eligible Courses. Courses will be considered eligible for TA if they are:

           (a) Part of an individual’s evaluated educational plan; or

           (b) Prerequisites for courses within the individual’s evaluated educational plan; or

           (c) Required for acceptance into a higher-level degree program, unless otherwise
specified by Service regulations.

   e. Use of Financial Aid With TA

         (1) “Top-Up” eligible active duty DoD personnel may use this Montgomery or Post-9/11
G.I. Bill benefit in conjunction with TA funds from their Service to cover those course costs to the
Service member that exceed the amount of TA paid by his or her Service. RC members who
qualify for Montgomery G.I. Bill benefits may use those benefits concurrently with TA. RC
members who have earned entitlement for the Post-9/11 G.I. Bill can use both VA education
benefits and TA, but VA will only pay for the portion of tuition not covered by TA. Therefore the
combination of VA education benefits and TA will not exceed 100 percent of the actual costs of
tuition.

        (2) DoD personnel are entitled to consideration for all forms of financial aid that
educational institutions make available to students at their home campus. Educational institution
financial aid officers will provide information and application processes for Title IV student aid
programs, scholarships, fellowships, grants, loans, etc., to DoD TA recipients.

         (3) Service members identified as eligible DoD TA recipients, who qualify for Pell Grants
through ED’s student aid program, will have their TA benefits applied to their educational
institution’s account prior to the application of their Pell Grant funds to their account. Unlike TA
funds, which are tuition-restricted, Pell Grant funds are not tuition-restricted and may be applied to
other allowable charges on the account.

   f. Administration of Tuition

        (1) The Services will provide TA in accordance with DoD- and Service-appropriate
regulations.

       (2) Educational institutions will comply with these requirements for the return of TA funds:

            (a) Return any TA Program funds directly to the Military Service, not to the Service
member.

           (b) Up to the start date, return all (100 percent) TA funds to the appropriate Military
Service when the Service member does not:


Change 4, 04/02/2020                              41             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                      DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued

                  (i) Begin attendance at the institution; or

                  (ii) Start a course, regardless of whether the student starts other courses.

               (c) Return any TA funds paid for a course that is cancelled by the educational
institution.

             (d) Have an institutional policy that returns any unearned TA funds on a proportional
basis through at least the 60 percent portion of the period for which the funds were provided. TA
funds are earned proportionally during an enrollment period, with unearned funds returned based
upon when a student stops attending. In instances when a Service member stops attending due to a
military service obligation, the educational institution will work with the affected Service member
to identify solutions that will not result in a student debt for the returned portion.

       (3) Tuition charged to a Service member will in no case exceed the rate charged to
nonmilitary students, unless agreed upon in writing by both the educational institution and the
Service.

         (4) Educational institutions will provide their tuition charges for each degree program to the
Services on an annual basis. Any changes in the tuition charges will be provided to and explained
to all the Services, as soon as possible, but not fewer than 90 days prior to implementation.

           (a) Tuition charges at many public institutions are established by entities over which
they have no jurisdiction, such as State legislatures and boards. As such, in some instances tuition
decisions will not be made within the 90-day requirement window.

            (b) When this happens, the educational institution will request a waiver, (via the DoD
MOU webpage) and provide the Services with the new tuition charges. To the extent practicable
by State law or regulation, Service members already enrolled will not be impacted by changes in
tuition charges.

        (5) TA invoicing information is located in the Service-specific addendums attached to this
MOU.

  g. Course Cancellations. Educational institutions are responsible for notifying Service
members of class cancellations for both classroom and DL courses.

    h. Materials and Electronic Accessibility

        (1) Educational institutions will ensure that course materials are readily available, either
electronically or in print medium, and provide information about where the student may obtain
class materials at the time of enrollment or registration.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                                42              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                       DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
        (2) Educational institution representatives will refrain from encouraging or requiring
students to purchase course materials prior to confirmation of sufficient enrollments to conduct the
class. Students will be encouraged to verify course acceptance by CCAF (Air Force only) or other
program(s), with the responsible education advisor before enrolling or requesting TA.

       (3) Educational institutions will provide, where available, electronic access to their main
administrative and academic center’s library materials, professional services, relevant periodicals,
books, and other academic reference and research resources in print or online format that are
appropriate or necessary to support the courses offered. Additionally, educational institutions will
ensure adequate print and non-print media resources to support all courses being offered, are
available at base or installation library facilities, on-site Institution resource areas, or via electronic
transmission.

    i. Graduation Achievement Recognition

       (1) The educational institution will issue, at no cost to the Government, documentation as
proof of completion, such as a diploma or certificate, to each student who completes the respective
program requirements and meets all financial obligations.

       (2) In accordance with Service requirements, the educational institution will report to the
Service concerned those TA recipients who have completed a certificate, diploma, or degree
program. Reporting will occur at least annually and include the degree level, major, and program
requirements completion date.

       (3) The academic credentials for certificate, diploma, or degree completion will reflect the
degree-granting educational institution and campus authorized to confer the degree.

             (a) If the Service member attends a branch of a large, multi-branch university system,
the diploma may indicate the credential of the specific campus or branch of the educational
institution from which the student received his or her degree.

           (b) Credentials will be awarded to Service members with the same institutional
designation as non-Service members who completed the same course work for a degree from the
same institution.

       (4) The educational institution will provide students with the opportunity to participate in a
graduation ceremony.

    j. Reporting Requirements and Performance Metrics

        (1) The educational institution will provide reports via electronic delivery on all DoD TA
recipients for programs and courses offered to personnel as required by the cognizant Service. This
includes, but is not limited to, TA transactions, final course grades to include incompletes and
withdrawals, degrees awarded, certificates earned, evaluated educational plans, courses offered, and


Change 4, 04/02/2020                                43               APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
military graduation. Educational institutions providing face-to-face courses on a DoD installation
will provide a class roster to the responsible education advisor. The class roster will include
information such as the name of the instructor, the first and last name of each student (military and
non-military), the course title, the class meeting day(s), the start and ending time of the class, and
the class location (e.g., building and room number).

           (a) All reporting and transmitting of this information will be done in conformity with all
applicable privacy laws, including FERPA.

           (b) Educational institutions will respond to these requests in a timely fashion, which
will vary based on the specific nature and scope of the information requested.

       (2) The cognizant Service may evaluate the educational institution’s overall effectiveness in
administering its academic program, courses, and customer satisfaction to the Department of
Defense. A written report of the findings will be provided to the educational institution. The
educational institution will have 90 calendar days to review the report, investigate if required, and
provide a written response to the findings.

        (3) The Services may request reports from an educational institution at any time, but not
later than 2 years after termination of the MOU with such educational institution. Responses to all
requests for reports will be provided within a reasonable period of time, and generally within 14
calendar days. Institutional response time will depend on the specific information sought by the
Services in the report.


5. REQUIREMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE DELIVERY OF ON-
INSTALLATION VOLUNTARY EDUCATION PROGRAMS AND SERVICES

    a. The requirements in this section pertain to educational institutions operating on a DoD
installation. An installation MOU:

       (1) Is required if an educational institution is operating on a DoD installation.

       (2) Contains only the installation-unique requirements coordinated by the responsible
education advisor, with concurrence from the appropriate Service voluntary education
representative, and approved by the installation commander.

        (3) Cannot conflict with the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU and governing
regulations.

   b. Educational institutions will:

        (1) Agree to have a separate installation MOU if they have a Service agreement to provide
on-installation courses or degree programs.


Change 4, 04/02/2020                              44              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued

       (2) Comply with the installation-unique requirements in the installation MOU.

       (3) Agree to coordinate degree programs offered on the DoD installation with the
responsible education advisor, who will receive approval from the installation commander, prior to
the opening of classes for registration.

        (4) Admit candidates to the educational institution’s on-installation programs at their
discretion; however, priority for registration in DoD installation classes will be given in the
following order:

           (a) Service members.

           (b) Federally funded DoD civilian employees.

           (c) Eligible adult family members of Service members and DoD civilian employees.

           (d) Military retirees.

           (e) Non-DoD personnel.

        (5) Provide the responsible education advisor, as appropriate, a tentative annual schedule of
course offerings to ensure that the educational needs of the military population on the DoD
installation are met and to ensure no course or scheduling conflicts with other on-installation
programs.

        (6) Provide instructors for their DoD installation courses who meet the criteria established
by the educational institution to qualify for employment as a faculty member on the main
administrative and academic center.

        (7) Inform the responsible education advisor about cancellations for classroom-based
classes on DoD installations per the guidelines set forth in the separate installation MOU.

    c. The Services’ designated installation representative (usually the responsible education
advisor) will be responsible for determining the local voluntary education program needs for the
serviced military population and for selecting the off-duty educational programs to be provided on
the DoD installation, in accordance with the Services’ policies. The Service, in conjunction with
the educational institution, will provide support services essential to operating effective educational
programs. All services provided will be commensurate with the availability of resources
(personnel, funds, and equipment). This support includes:

       (1) Classroom and office space, as available. The Service will determine the adequacy of
provided space.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                              45              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
         (2) Repairs as required to maintain office and classroom space in “good condition” as
determined by the Service, and utility services for the offices and classrooms of the educational
institution located on the DoD installation (e.g., electricity, water, and heat).

      (3) Standard office and classroom furnishings within available resources. No specialized
equipment will be provided.

       (4) Janitorial services in accordance with DoD installation facility management policies and
contracts.

   d. The Service reserves the right to disapprove DoD installation access to any employee or
agent of the educational institution employed to carry out any part of this MOU.

    e. Operation of a privately owned vehicle by educational institution employees or agents on the
installation will be governed by the DoD installation’s policies.

    f. The responsible education advisor will check with his or her Service’s responsible office for
voluntary education before allowing an educational institution to enter into an MOU with the DoD
installation.


6. REVIEW, MODIFICATIONS, SIGNATURES, EFFECTIVE DATE, EXPIRATION DATE,
AND CANCELLATION PROVISION

    a. Review. The signatories (or their successors) will review this MOU periodically in
coordination with the Services, but no less than every 5 years, to consider items such as current
accreditation status, updated program offerings, and program delivery services.

    b. Modifications. Modifications to this MOU will be in writing and, except for those required
due to a change in State or Federal law, will be subject to approval by both of the signatories below,
or their successors.

    c. Signatures. The authorized signatory for DoD will be designated by the USD(P&R). The
authorized signatory for the educational institution will be determined by the educational
institution.

   d. Effective Date. This MOU is effective on the date of the later signature.

   e. Expiration Date. This MOU will expire 5 years from the effective date, unless terminated or
updated prior to that date in writing by DoD or the educational institution.

    f. Cancellation Provision. This MOU may be cancelled by either DoD or the educational
institution 30 days after receipt of the written notice from the cancelling party. In addition,
termination and suspension of an MOU with an educational institution may be done at any time for


Change 4, 04/02/2020                             46              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


    Figure 1. Template of DoD MOU Between DoD Office of the USD(P&R) and Educational
                                  Institution, Continued
failure to follow a term of this MOU or misconduct in accordance with subsection 1r of Enclosure
3of DoDI 1322.25.


FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE:                      FOR THE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION:


_________________________                           _______________________
DESIGNATED SIGNATORY                                  PRESIDENT or Designee


_____________                                       ______________
DATE                                                DATE




Change 4, 04/02/2020                           47             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


Figure 2. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the U.S.
                                      Air Force


                           ADDENDUM FOR EDUCATION SERVICES
                                        BETWEEN
                           [NAME OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION]
                                           AND
                                THE U.S. AIR FORCE (USAF)


1. PURPOSE. This addendum is between [Name of Educational Institution], hereafter referred
to as the “Institution,” and the USAF. The purpose of this agreement is to provide guidelines
and procedures for the delivery of educational services to Service members, DoD civilian
employees, eligible adult family members, military retirees, and non-DoD personnel not covered
in the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between
the DoD Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the
Institution. This addendum is not to be construed in any way as giving rise to a contractual
obligation of the USAF to provide funds to the Institution that would be contrary to Federal law.


2. RESPONSIBILITIES

   a. USAF Education and Training Section (ETS) Chief. The USAF ETS Chief will:

         (1) Maintain a continuing liaison with the designated Institution representative and be
responsible for inspections and the acceptance of the Institution’s services. The ETS Chief will
assist the Institution representative to provide military and USAF culture orientation to the
Institution personnel.

       (2) Review requests from Institutions with no on-installation MOU for permission of
DoD installation access and space within the ETS to counsel current students, provide
information briefings and materials, attend education fairs, and provide other informational
services approved by the installation commander. Approval depends on the installation
commander. Approval of any school eligible for Military TA will be extended equally to all
such schools; same time allotment, space, and frequency.

        (3) Assist the Institution or refer them to the information technology contractor for
training in the use of Academic Institution Portal (AI Portal) regarding input of Institution
information, degree offerings, tuition rates, grades, invoices, degree completions, and search
tools pre-built into the USAF online Voluntary Education System.

   b. Institutions will:

       (1) Appoint and designate an Institution representative to maintain a continuing liaison
with the USAF ETS Chief.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                             48              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


Figure 2. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the U.S.
                                Air Force, Continued

         (2) Provide general degree requirements to each member for his or her educational
program and the ETS as soon as he or she makes known their intention to register with the
Institution and while awaiting final evaluation of transfer credits.

         (3) Assume responsibility for the administration and proctoring of all course
examinations not normally administered and proctored within the traditional, in-the-classroom
setting.

        (4) Provide to airmen, upon their request, information on Institution policies including,
but not limited to, course withdrawal dates and penalties, course cancellation procedures, course
grade publication, and policy regarding incompletion of a course. Face-to-face counseling is not
required.

        (5) Register and use the AI Portal to input Institution basic information, degree offerings,
tuition rates, invoice submission, course grades submission, degree completions, and to pull pre-
established educational institution reports while conducting business with the USAF.

        (6) Submit one consolidated invoice per term via the AI Portal for each class in which
active duty military airmen are enrolled using Mil TA. Submission will be made during the
term, no earlier than after the final add/drop/census date, and no later than 30 calendar days after
the end of the term.

       (7) Submit course grades via the AI Portal for each class in which active duty military
airmen are enrolled using Mil TA. Submission will be made no later than 30 calendar days after
the end of the term.

        (8) Adopt the AI Portal procedures for all payment processing. Institutions with a
current waiver may continue to participate at the discretion of Air Force Voluntary Education
Branch.

       (9) Provide a list of program graduates via the AI Portal consisting of student name,
program title, program type (such as bachelor’s degree), and date of graduation no later than 30
calendar days after the end of the term in which graduation requirements are completed. If the
AI Portal is not available, provide directly to the base Education and Training Section.

    c. Institutions with no on-installation MOU are authorized to request permission for DoD
installation access and space within the ETS to counsel current students, provide information
briefings and materials, attend education fairs, and other informational services. Approval
depends on the installation commander. If approval is granted, then all other permissions will be
authorized equally for any school eligible for Military TA; the same time allotment, space, and
frequency.

   d. All Institutions with an on-installation MOU or invitation for an on-installation activity,


Change 4, 04/02/2020                              49              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


such as an educational fair, are authorized to counsel or provide information on any of their
programs.


3. ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES

    a. In addition to DoD policy outlined in the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU, the
authorization of Mil TA is further governed by Air Force Instruction 36-2306, as well as
applicable policy and guidance.

    b. DoD installation access of non-DoD and non-installation personnel is at the discretion of
the installation commander. Access once provided can be revoked at any time due to military
necessity or due to conduct that violates DoD installation rules or policies.

   c. No off-base school will be given permanent space or scheduled for regularly recurring
time on-base for student counseling.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                             50              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


Figure 3. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the U.S.
                                       Army

                         ADDENDUM FOR EDUCATION SERVICES
                                     BETWEEN
                         [NAME OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION]
                                       AND
                                   THE U.S. ARMY


1. PURPOSE. This addendum is between [Name of Educational Institution], hereafter referred
to as the “Institution,” and the U.S. Army. The purpose of this agreement is to provide
guidelines and procedures for the delivery of educational services to Service members, DoD
civilian employees, eligible adult family members, military retirees, and non-DoD personnel not
covered in the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
between the DoD Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the
Institution. This addendum is not to be construed in any way as giving rise to a contractual
obligation of the U.S. Army to provide funds to the Institution that would be contrary to Federal
law.


2. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. Army Education Services Officer (ESO). In support of this addendum, the Army ESO
will maintain a continuing liaison with a designated Institution representative and be responsible
for inspections and the acceptance of the Institution’s services. The ESO will provide assistance
to the Institution representative to provide military and Army culture orientation to the Institution
personnel.

   b. Institution. The Institution will:

       (1) Appoint and designate an Institution representative to maintain a continuing liaison
with the Army ESO.

        (2) Adopt the GoArmyEd processes. GoArmyEd is the Army Continuing Education
System (ACES) centralized and streamlined management system for the Army’s postsecondary
voluntary education programs. Existing MOUs or Memorandums of Agreement, Tri-Services
contracts, or other contracts that Institutions may have with DoD installations and ACES remain
in place and will be supplemented with DoD Instruction 1322.25.

        (3) Agree to all of the terms in the ACES policies and procedures, available at
https://www.hrc.army.mil/site/education/GoArmyEd_School_Instructions.html, such as
invoicing, grades, reports, library references, etc. For non-Letter of Instruction (LOI) institutions
satisfying paragraph 3.f. of this MOU, any requirements in ACES policies and procedures
requiring institutions to be a member of SOC are hereby waived.



Change 4, 04/02/2020                              51              APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011



        (4) Institutions currently participating with GoArmyEd as LOI and non-LOI schools,
 may continue to do so at the discretion of Headquarters, ACES. Non-LOI schools will be
 subject to the requirements of paragraphs 2.b.(2) and 2.b.(3) of this MOU only to the extent
 that their existing non-LOI agreement with the U.S. Army provides.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                            52             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


Figure 4. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the U.S.
                                    Marine Corps

                         ADDENDUM FOR EDUCATION SERVICES
                                     BETWEEN
                         [NAME OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION]
                                         AND
                               THE U.S. MARINE CORPS


1. PURPOSE. This addendum is between [Name of Educational Institution], hereafter referred
to as the “Institution,” and the U.S. Marine Corps. The purpose of this agreement is to provide
guidelines and procedures for the delivery of educational services to Service members, DoD
civilian employees, eligible adult family members, military retirees, and non-DoD personnel not
covered in the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership Memorandum of Understanding between
the DoD Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the
Institution. This addendum is not to be construed in any way as giving rise to a contractual
obligation of the U.S. Marine Corps to provide funds to the Institution that would be contrary to
Federal law.


2. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. Marine Corps Education Services Officer (ESO). In support of this addendum, the Marine
Corps ESO will maintain a continuing liaison with a designated Institution representative and be
responsible for inspections and the acceptance of the Institution’s services. The ESO will
provide assistance to the Institution representative to provide military and Marine Corps culture
orientation to the Institution personnel.

   b. Institution. The Institution will:

       (1) Appoint and designate an Institution representative to maintain a continuing liaison
with the Marine Corps ESO.

       (2) Provide open enrollment during a designated time period in courses conducted
through media (e.g., portable media devices or computer-aided). Those courses will be on an
individual enrollment basis.

        (3) When operating on a Marine Corps installation, provide all required equipment when
the Institution provides instruction via media.

         (4) When operating on a Marine Corps installation, provide library services to the
Marine Corps installation for students in the form of research and reference materials (e.g.,
books, pamphlets, magazines) of similar quality to the support provided students on the
institution's home campus. Services will also include research and reference material in
sufficient quantity to meet curriculum and program demands. Materials will be, at a minimum,
the required readings of the instructor(s) for a particular course or program, or the


Change 4, 04/02/2020                             53             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011



Figure 4. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the U.S.
                                       Marine Corps, Continued
ability for the student to request a copy of such material, from the institution’s main library,
without any inconvenience or charge to the student (e.g., a library computer terminal that may
allow students to order material and have it mailed to their residence).

        (5) Permit employment of off-duty military personnel or Government civilian employees
by the institution, provided such employment does not conflict with the policies set forth in DoD
Regulation 5500.7-R. However, Government personnel employed in any way in the
administration of this addendum will be excluded from such employment because of conflict of
interest.


3. BILLING PROCEDURES AND FORMAL GRADES

    a. Comply with wide area work flow process for invoicing tuition assistance available at
https://www.navycollege.navy.mil/links.

   b. Grades will be submitted through the Navy College Management Information System
grade entry application.

   c. Grade reports will be provided to the Naval Education and Training Professional
Development and Technology Center within 30 days of term ending date or completion of the
course, whichever is earlier.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                            54             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


Figure 5. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the U.S.
                                        Navy

                         ADDENDUM FOR EDUCATION SERVICES
                                     BETWEEN
                         [NAME OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION]
                                       AND
                                   THE U.S. NAVY


1. PURPOSE. This addendum is between [Name of Educational Institution], hereafter referred
to as the “Institution,” and the U.S. Navy. The purpose of this agreement is to provide guidelines
and procedures for the delivery of educational services to Service members, DoD civilian
employees, eligible adult family members, military retirees, and non-DoD personnel not covered
in the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership Memorandum of Understanding between the DoD
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the Institution. This
addendum is not to be construed in any way as giving rise to a contractual obligation of the
Department of the Navy to provide funds to the Institution that would be contrary to Federal law.

2. RESPONSIBILITIES

   a. Commanding Officer Responsible for Execution of the Voluntary Education Program.
The commanding officer responsible for execution of the voluntary education program will:

       (1) Determine the local voluntary education program needs for the Navy population to be
served and recommend to the installation commander the educational programs to be offered on
the base.

       (2) Administer this agreement and provide program management support.

      (3) Manage the Navy College Program Distance Learning Partnership (NCPDLP)
agreements.

    b. Navy College Office (NCO). In support of this addendum, the NCO will maintain a
continuing liaison with the designated Institution representative and be responsible for
inspections and the acceptance of the Institution’s services. The NCO will provide assistance to
the Institution representative to provide military and Navy culture orientation to the Institution
personnel.

   c. Institution. The Institution will:

       (1) If a distance learning partner institution:

           (a) Comply with NCPDLP agreements, if an institution participates in NCPDLP.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              55             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


Figure 5. MOU Addendum for Education Services Between Educational Institution and the U.S.
                                  Navy, Continued

            (b) Provide a link to the institution through the Navy College Program Website, only
if designated as an NCPDLP school.

           (c) Display the Institution’s advertising materials (i.e., pamphlets, posters, and
brochures) at all NCOs, only if designated as an NCPDLP school.

       (2) Appoint and designate an Institution representative to maintain a continuing liaison
with the NCO staff.

       (3) Comply with wide area work flow processes for invoicing of tuition assistance.
Grades will be submitted to the Navy College Management Information System grade entry
application available at https://www.navycollege.navy.mil/links.

         (4) Ensure library resource arrangements are in accordance with the standards of the
Institution’s accrediting association and the State regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the
Institution.

       (5) Respond to e-mail messages from students within a reasonable period of time -
generally within 2 workdays, unless extenuating circumstances would justify additional time.

       (6) Comply with host command procedures before starting instructor-based courses on
any Navy installation. The NCO will negotiate a separate agreement with the Institution in
concert with the host command procedures.

      (7) Mail an official transcript indicating degree completion, at no cost to the sailor or the
Government, to:

       Center for Personal and Professional Development
       ATTN: Virtual Education Center
       1905 Regulus Ave., Suite 234
       Virginia Beach, VA 23461-2009




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              56             APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                            DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


                                           GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACE            American Council on Education
ACES           Army Continuing Education System
AGR            Active Guard and Reserve
AI             academic institution
AARTS          Army/ACE Registry Transcript System
ASD(M&RA)      Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
ASD(R&FM)      Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness and Force Management

CCAF           Community College of the Air Force
CDR            cohort default rate
CD-ROM         compact disc read-only memory
CFPB           Consumer Financial Protection Bureau

DANTES     Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support
DASD(MCFP) Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Community and
           Family Policy
DL         distance learning
DoDD       DoD directive
DoDI       DoD instruction
DOJ        U.S. Department of Justice

EA             Executive Agent
ED             U.S. Department of Education
ESO            Education Services Officer
ETS            Education and Training Section

FERPA          Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
FTC            Federal Trade Commission

GPA            grade point average

IRR            Individual Ready Reserve

JST            joint services transcript

LOI            Letter of Instruction

Mil TA         military tuition assistance
MOU            memorandum of understanding

NCPDLP         Navy College Program Distance Learning Partnership




Change 4, 04/02/2020                          57                             GLOSSARY
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


OPE ID            Office of Postsecondary Education identification number

RC                Reserve Component

SELRES            Selected Reserve
SMARTS            Sailor/Marine ACE Registry Transcript System
SOC               Service members Opportunity Colleges

TA                tuition assistance
TTT               Troops-to-Teachers

USAF              United States Air Force
U.S.C.            United States Code
USD(P&R)          Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness

VA                U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
VEMIS             Voluntary Education Management Information System


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

academic. Relating to education, educational studies, an educational institution, or the
educational system.

academic skills. Competencies in English, reading, writing, speaking, mathematics, and
computer skills that are essential to successful job performance and new learning. Also referred
to as functional or basic skills.

ACE. The major coordinating body for all of the Nation’s higher education institutions. Seeks
to provide leadership and a unifying voice on key higher education issues and publishes the
Guide to the Evaluation of Educational Experiences in the Armed Services.

AGR. National Guard or Reserve members of the SELRES who are ordered to active duty or
full-time National Guard duty for a period of 180 consecutive days or more for the purpose of
organizing, administering, recruiting, instructing, or training the RC units or duties prescribed in
section 12310 of Reference (f). All AGR members must be assigned against an authorized
mobilization position in the unit they support. (Includes Navy full-time support, Marine Corps
Active Reserve, and Coast Guard Reserve Personnel Administrators).

annual TA ceiling. The maximum dollar amount authorized for each Service member for TA per
fiscal year. Each Service member participating in off-duty voluntary education programs will be
entitled to the full amount authorized each fiscal year in accordance with DoD policy.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              58                                   GLOSSARY
                                                                   DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


Army/ACE Registry Transcript System. A document sent directly from the Army/ACE Registry
Transcript System Center to the educational institution to articulate a soldier’s military
experience and training and the ACE-recommended college credit for this training and
experience. The JST consolidates data from the legacy Army/ACE Registry Transcript System.

degree requirements. A document provided by the educational institution that outlines required
courses and conditions to complete an educational program. The document presents the general
education, major-related, and elective course requirements, degree competencies (e.g., foreign
language, computer literacy), and other requirements (e.g., examination, thesis, dissertation,
practicum, grade point average, credits by course level, or academic residency) for the specified
program of study. This document becomes the basis for the evaluated educational plan.

DoD installation. For the purposes of this instruction, any active duty military, Reserve or
National Guard owned, leased, or operated base, reservation, post, site, camp, building, or other
facility to which DoD personnel are assigned for duty.

education advisor. A professionally qualified subject matter expert or program manager in the
Education Services Series 1740 or possessing equivalent qualifications at the education center.
The following position titles may also be used for an education advisor: Education Services
Specialist, ESO, Voluntary Education Director, Navy College Office Director, and Education
and Training Section Chief.

education center. A DoD installation facility, including office space, classrooms, laboratories, or
other features, that is staffed with professionally qualified personnel and to conduct voluntary
education programs. This may be located at an active duty military installation, Reserve and
National Guard facility (state readiness center, armory, unit, etc.), or recruiting center (leased
space inside a shopping mall or office building). For Navy, this is termed the “Navy College
Office.”

educational institution. A college, university, or other institution of higher education. For the
purposes of this instruction, the parent/home/main campus and any sub-campuses included in the
signed MOU with DoD.

educational institution representative. An employee of the educational institution.

educational institution agent. A lawful agent of the educational institution is limited to persons
who have written authorization to act on behalf of the educational institutions.

eligible adult family member. The adult family member, over the age of 18, of an active duty,
Reserve, National Guardsman, or DoD civilian with a valid DoD identification card.

evaluated educational plan. An individualized official academic document provided by the
educational institution that (1) articulates all degree requirements for degree completion or in the
case of a non-degree program, all educational requirements for completion of the program; (2)
identifies all courses required for graduation in the individual’s intended academic discipline and
level of postsecondary study; and (3) includes an evaluation of all successfully completed prior



Change 4, 04/02/2020                              59                                  GLOSSARY
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


coursework, and evaluated credit for military training and experience, and other credit sources
applied to the institutional degree requirements. At a minimum, the evaluated educational plan
will identify required courses and where appropriate, College Level Examination Program,
DSST (formerly known as the DANTES Subject Standardized Tests) Program, and potential
American Council on Education recommended college credits for training and experiences. For
participating SOC Degree Network System institutions, the SOC Degree Network System
Student Agreement serves as this evaluated educational plan. For some educational institutions
this may be termed a degree audit.

IRR. A manpower pool consisting principally of individuals who have had training, have
previously served in the Active Component or in the SELRES, and have some period of their
military service obligation or other contractual obligation remaining. Some individuals volunteer
to remain in the IRR beyond their military service or contractual obligation and participate in
programs providing a variety of professional assignments and opportunities for earning
retirement points and military benefits.

joint services transcript. An official education transcript tool for documenting the recommended
ACE college credits for a variety of professional military education, training courses, and
occupational experience of Service members across the Services. The JST consolidates data
from legacy documents such as the Army/ACE Registry Transcript System, the Sailor/Marine
ACE Registry Transcript System, the CCAF transcript, and the Coast Guard Institute transcript.

needs assessment. A process used to determine the staffing requirements, course offerings, size
of facilities, funding, or other standards for delivery of educational programs.

off-duty. Time when the Service member is not scheduled to perform official duties.

Ready Reserve. Composed of military members of the Reserve and National Guard, organized
in units or as individuals, or both, and liable for involuntary order to active duty in time of war or
national emergency pursuant to sections 12310 and 12301 of Reference (f) and section 712 of
Reference (o) in the case of members of the Coast Guard Reserve. The Ready Reserve consists
of the SELRES, the IRR, and the Inactive National Guard.

Sailor/Marine ACE Registry Transcript System. A document sent directly from the
Sailor/Marine ACE Registry Transcript System Operations Center to the educational institution
to articulate a Sailor’s or Marine’s military experience and training and the ACE recommended
college credit for this training and experience. The JST consolidates data from the legacy
Sailor/Marine ACE Registry Transcript System.

SELRES. Those units and individuals within the Ready Reserve designated by their respective
Service as essential to wartime missions and who must therefore maintain a higher priority over
all other Reserves. The SELRES includes Reserve unit members (including members in the
training pipeline and drilling Reservists in units), individual mobilization augmentees, and AGR
members.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                               60                                   GLOSSARY
                                                                    DoDI 1322.25, March 15, 2011


semester-hour TA cap. The maximum dollar amount authorized for TA per semester-hour (or
equivalent) credit. A Service will pay no more than the established DoD cap per semester-unit
(or equivalent) for tuition.

SOC. A consortium of over 1800 colleges and universities, created in 1972 that seeks to enhance
the educational opportunities to Service members who may have difficulty in completing college
programs due to frequent military moves.

TA. Funds provided by the Military Services or U.S. Coast Guard to pay a percentage of the
charges of an educational institution for the tuition of an active duty, Reserve, or National Guard
member of the Military Services, or Coast Guard member, enrolled in approved courses of study
during off-duty time.

Third Party Education Assessment. A third-party evaluation of voluntary education programs
covered by the DoD Voluntary Education Partnership MOU.

Top-Up. An option, under the Montgomery G.I. Bill and the Post-9/11 G.I. Bill, that enables
active duty Service members and certain Reservists to receive from the VA those tuition costs
that exceed or are not authorized in the amount of TA provided to the Service member by his or
her Service. Entitlement is charged differently depending on which G.I Bill program a Service
member uses.

   The Montgomery G.I. Bill entitlement is charged based on the dollar amount of benefits VA
pays to the individual. The Service member will be charged one month of entitlement for each
payment received that is equal to the full time monthly rate for the Montgomery G.I. Bill.

    The Post-9/11 entitlement is charged based on the enrolled amount of time and the
individual’s rate of pursuit during the period of entitlement. If a Service member is attending
classes part-time or at the half- time level, the charge is1/2 month of Post-9/11 G.I. Bill benefits
for each month enrolled and receiving G.I. Bill benefits.

TTT Program. A DoD program to assist transitioning Service members and veterans in meeting
the requirements necessary to become a teacher and facilitating their subsequent employment.

voluntary education programs. Continuing, adult, or postsecondary education programs of study
that Service members elect to participate in during their off-duty time, and that are available to
other members of the military community.




Change 4, 04/02/2020                              61                                   GLOSSARY
