                               DOD DIRECTIVE 5105.89
     CHIEF DIGITAL AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE OFFICER

Originating Component:        Office of the Performance Improvement Officer and Director of
                              Administration and Management

Effective:                    November 18, 2024

Releasability:                Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division Website
                              at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Incorporates and Cancels: See Paragraph 1.2.

Approved by:                  Kathleen H. Hicks, Deputy Secretary of Defense


Purpose: This issuance establishes the responsibilities and functions, relationships, and authorities of
the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence (AI) Officer (CDAO) pursuant to the authority vested in the
Secretary of Defense by Section 113 of Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.).
                                                                                           DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Incorporated and Canceled Documents. ........................................................................... 3
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS .............................................................................. 4
SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS ............................................................................................................ 9
   3.1. CDAO. .............................................................................................................................. 9
   3.2. PSAs and DoD Component Heads. .................................................................................. 9
SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES .............................................................................................................. 10
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 12
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 13




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                               DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY.

    This issuance applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this
issuance as the “DoD Components”).


1.2. INCORPORATED AND CANCELED DOCUMENTS.

This issuance incorporates and cancels:

   a. Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandums:

       (1) “Establishment of the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer,” December 8,
2021

       (2) “Establishment of the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center,” June 27, 2018

       (3) “Initial Operating Capability of the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer,”
February 1, 2022

       (4) “Role Clarity for the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer,” February 1,
2022

   b. DoD Directive 5105.87, “Director, Defense Digital Service (DDS),” January 5, 2017, as
amended




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                              3
                                                               DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


               SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS
The CDAO is the Principal Staff Assistant (PSA) and advisor to the Secretary of Defense for all
matters relating to DoD adoption and integration of data, analytics, and AI capabilities to
generate competitive advantage. The CDAO is the senior official with primary policy oversight
responsibility for the development and deployment of algorithmic warfare and modernization
efforts around data, analytics, and AI. In the exercise of assigned responsibilities, the CDAO:

    a. Serves as DoD’s principal officer responsible for accelerating the adoption of data,
analytics, and AI capabilities, as well as other relevant digital technologies, to generate
competitive advantage across the defense enterprise; developing data, analytics, and AI strategic
guidance and formulating related policy; creating enabling digital services which consist of the
iterative development and delivery of digital assets (e.g., code, data, content), software (e.g.,
code, application programming interfaces, applications), and services (e.g., technical guidance,
training, best practices) that support DoD Components’ development and deployment of data,
analytics, and AI solutions; and ensuring unity of mission and tighter integration for DoD
enterprise-wide digital, data, analytics, and AI organizations.

    b. Serves as DoD’s Chief Artificial Intelligence Officer (CAIO) pursuant to Executive Order
14110, exercising the full range of authorities and responsibilities assigned to the CAIO and
other applicable Presidential policies and guidance.

    c. Serves as the Senior Official with Principal Responsibility for AI and Machine Learning,
and exercises all associated responsibilities and functions, including the coordination of activities
relating to the development and demonstration of AI and machine learning for the DoD.

   d. Serves as the Chief Data Officer for DoD pursuant to Section 3520 of Title 44, U.S.C and
Office of Management and Budget Memorandum M-19-23.

    e. Identifies, accesses, shares, and appropriately reuses DoD data and models of defense
components and elements to build and maintain AI capabilities to support DoD missions and
activities.

   f. Leverages and enables new and novel approaches to remove outdated and
counterproductive barriers to data and AI adoption within appropriate DoD institutional
processes, in coordination with other senior officials of the DoD.

    g. Supports and assists DoD Components in the development and deployment of data,
analytics, and AI capabilities by identifying, supporting, and accelerating the use of
infrastructure, platforms, tools, and services.

   h. Develops an overarching framework and standards for development, delivery, and
adoption of data, analytics, and AI capabilities.

    i. Vets, selects, and sponsors data services, analytic capabilities, and AI-enabled solutions,
based on quantitative and qualitative metrics, to service common concerns for the DoD for
scaled application in support of enterprise and joint use cases. Selectively scales proven data,



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                            4
                                                               DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


analytics, and AI-enabled solutions for enterprise and joint use cases in coordination with
decision-makers at all levels of the DoD.

   j. Facilitates and, where possible, provides surged digital services that enable data, analytics,
and AI solutions either from resources of the Office of the CDAO (OCDAO) or through
coordination among DoD Components for rapid response to crises and emergent challenges.

    k. Develops, publishes, and oversees the use of a DoD federated data catalog and common
data models, and provides the official source of executive analytics for Secretary of Defense and
Deputy Secretary of Defense enterprise-wide reporting, as well as reporting for other senior
leaders, as determined to be appropriate and feasible by the CDAO.

    l. Promotes enterprise alignment among disparate data sources and data domains through
policy oversight of data management practices.

    m. Leads the development and implementation of AI assurance strategy, guidance, and
policy, including the application of DoD’s AI Ethical Principles in the February 21, 2020
Secretary of Defense Memorandum and responsible AI practices.

   n. Develops methodologies, tools, and best practices to advance the DoD’s capability and
capacity to appropriately test and evaluate AI and AI-enabled capabilities.

    o. In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering
(USD(R&E)), provides guidance and assistance for integrating AI into system engineering
policies and procedures.

    p. In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
(USD(A&S)), provides guidance and assistance for integrating AI into policies and practices
related to modern acquisition, contracting, and intellectual property.

    q. In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
(USD(I&S)) and the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Privacy, Civil Liberties, and
Transparency (ATSD(PCLT)), authorizes Defense Intelligence Components to provide data
services, analytic capabilities, and AI-enabled solutions in support of enterprise and joint use
cases.

   r. In coordination with the USD(I&S), engages with elements of the Intelligence Community
and provides advice to senior leaders with regard to those policies and functions of the
USD(I&S) associated with data, analytics, and AI.

    s. Advises PSAs and DoD Component heads on the acquisition and use of data, analytics,
visualizations, and tools to support capability portfolio management (CPM), including:

        (1) Participates in appropriate CPM forums to ensure that enabling data and analytics
align with DoD data and analytics strategies, policies, and investment planning and integrate
across joint capability areas accordingly.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                          5
                                                               DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


        (2) Coordinates with other PSAs and DoD Component heads, as appropriate, to develop,
document, and manage authoritative data, including the standardization of data format, sharing
of data assets, and publication of data assets, data models, and data rights to support CPM.
Ensures transparency, availability, and applicability of data, data models, and visualization of
data pursuant to all relevant law and policy.

       (3) Develops and maintains CPM metric visualizations and tools, in coordination with
the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense,
the USD(A&S), and the USD(R&E), leveraging data automation, and digital engineering
pursuant to the DoD Digital Engineering Strategy to the maximum extent possible.

    t. Participates in functional capabilities boards on joint capability development when
capabilities have an AI component, as part of the Joint Requirements Oversight Council support
to the CJCS.

   u. Serves as an advisor to the Joint Requirements Oversight Council.

   v. Carries out activities to develop, distribute, and support AI capabilities across the DoD.

    w. Establishes and chairs the CDAO Council to oversee enterprise data governance and data
quality, and resolve issues related to the adoption and use of data, analytics, and AI capabilities.
Communicates and coordinates with other governance forums and officials, including those in
the Intelligence Community, as needed to address shared equities or potential conflicts.

  x. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Combatant
Commanders:

       (1) Conducts synchronized demonstrations of data, analytics, and AI capabilities to
measure, assess, and drive progress in support of initiatives to address national defense strategy
key operational problems and the joint warfighting concept.

        (2) Establishes best practices, processes, and methodologies, and develops related
policies, to sanitize data for algorithm development, training, and deployment.

   y. Informs the DoD CIO’s certification of DoD Component information technology budgets
with reference to data, analytics, and AI technologies.

    z. Informs the DoD CIO on the unique security measures required to assess and authorize
data, analytics, and AI capabilities.

    aa. Coordinates with the DoD CIO on the development, implementation and oversight of
data policies that affect DoD information, records, and related policies for which the CIO has
responsibility, consistent with DoD Directive (DoDD) 5144.02.

    ab. In coordination with the USD(A&S), the USD(R&E), the DoD CIO, the Director of the
Defense Innovation Unit, and other senior officials, engages with industry on data, analytics, and
AI, and advises the DoD on how to maintain a healthy industrial base to deliver data, analytics,
and AI capabilities.


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                            6
                                                               DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


   ac. In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, leads international
engagements to enable AI readiness, responsibly leverage data, comport with data sharing
requests and requirements, and adopt responsible AI capabilities at speed and scale.

    ad. Supports the identification and assessment of data, analytics, and AI capabilities that are
eligible for foreign military sales.

    ae. Serves as the functional community manager for the data, analytics, and AI community,
carrying out functional community manager responsibilities in accordance with Volume 250 of
DoD Instruction (DoDI) 1400.25.

   af. Synchronizes communication strategies with the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for
Public Affairs and obtains release authority for all public affairs activities concerning matters
under the purview of the CDAO and related communication directed at members of the public
and news media entities such as media engagements and press releases, as well as social media
and public web content strategies in accordance with DoDD 5122.05, DoDI 5400.13, DoDI
5400.17, DoDI 5405.03, and DoDI 5410.19.

    ag. In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, serves
as the DoD coordinator for the development and sustainment of the DoD data, analytics, and AI
workforce. Develops and provides implementation guidance to DoD Components on digital
education and relevant talent management strategies.

    ah. Supports projects or programs that materially improve digital services that enable data,
analytics, and AI solutions through the maintenance of a cadre of commercially experienced
digital services experts internally within the OCDAO. Additionally:

        (1) Provides resources from the OCDAO cadre of experts, when available, or seeks
personnel from other PSAs and DoD Components to support the completion of projects
identified by the CDAO to be a priority.

      (2) Determines the scope of activities for specific projects or programs in support of the
DoD digital services that enable data, analytics, and AI solutions.

        (3) Identifies and advocates for novel solutions and innovations in the way the DoD
builds, buys, and deploys digital services and supporting technologies.

       (4) Identifies and advocates for best-in-class private sector practices, talent, and
technology to be applied to DoD problems, as appropriate.

    ai. In coordination with the ATSD(PCLT), ensures proper consideration of privacy, civil
liberties, and transparency for matters under the purview of the CDAO, including appropriate
safeguarding of data containing personally identifiable information.

    aj. Utilizes special hiring authorities as available, through appropriate human resources
support organizations, including the Cyber Excepted Service pursuant to Section 1599f of Title
5, U.S.C.



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                          7
                                                              DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


   ak. Serves as advisor to the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and
appropriate DoD Component heads and officials regarding the employment of highly qualified
experts pursuant to Section 9903 of Title 5, U.S.C., in occupational fields related to data,
analytics, and AI.

    al. Assesses the DoD Executive Agent assignments under the cognizance of the CDAO
periodically for continued need, currency, and effectiveness and efficiency in satisfying end-user
requirements, in accordance with DoDD 5101.01.

   am. Uses existing systems, facilities, and services of DoD and other Federal departments and
agencies, when possible, to avoid duplication and achieve maximum efficiency and economy.

    an. In coordination with the USD(I&S), exercises authority and responsibility for disclosing
and releasing AI-related classified military information pursuant to AI-related classified military
information in accordance with reporting obligations imposed be Executive Orders and other
Presidential policies and guidance.

   ao. Performs such other duties as the Secretary of Defense may prescribe.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                         8
                                                              DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


                             SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS

3.1. CDAO.

In performing assigned responsibilities and functions, the CDAO:

   a. Reports directly to the Secretary of Defense.

   b. Exercises authority, direction, and control over:

       (1) The Principal Deputy CDAO.

        (2) The CDAO Senior Acquisition Executive responsible for those programmatic and
acquisition activities identified by the CDAO pursuant to Section 808 of Public Law 116-283,
also known as the “William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2021”.

        (3) Such other positions and organizations as may be established by the CDAO
consistent with applicable law and policies, using resources provided by the Secretary of
Defense.

   c. Coordinates and exchanges information with other OSD officials, the DoD Component
heads, and Federal, State, or local officials having collateral or related functions.


3.2. PSAS AND DOD COMPONENT HEADS.

The PSAs and DoD Component heads coordinate with the CDAO on all matters under their
purview related to the responsibilities, functions, and authorities assigned to the CDAO in this
issuance.




SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS                                                                           9
                                                              DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


                              SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to the authority,
direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense, and in accordance with DoD policies and
issuances, the CDAO is hereby delegated authority to exercise, within its area of assigned
responsibilities and functions, all authority of the Secretary of Defense derived from statute,
Executive order (E.O.), or interagency agreement, except where specifically limited by statute or
E.O. to the Secretary of Defense. The CDAO is specifically delegated authority to:

    a. Establish DoD policy through DoDIs, directive-type memorandums (DTMs), and rules
published in the Federal Register, within the authorities and responsibilities assigned in this
issuance and in accordance with DoDI 5025.01 or Administrative Instruction 102.

       (1) In those documents, assign responsibilities related to the authorities and
responsibilities in this issuance to other PSAs and DoD Component heads. Assignment of
responsibilities in DoD issuances or rules published in the Federal Register to Military
Department officials must be made through the Secretaries of those Departments. DoD
issuances or rules published in the Federal Register assigning responsibilities to the Combatant
Commanders must be coordinated with the CJCS.

       (2) DoDIs and DTMs must be fully coordinated in accordance with DoDI 5025.01.
Rules published in the Federal Register must be fully coordinated with impacted OSD and DoD
Component heads and be in accordance with Administrative Instruction 102.

       (3) This authority may not be redelegated.

   b. Approve other DoDIs, DoD manuals, and DTMs in areas of assigned responsibilities and
functions that implement policy already established by a DoDD, DoDI, DTM, or policy
memorandum issued by the Secretary of Defense or Deputy Secretary of Defense.

       (1) In these documents, assign responsibilities related to the authorities and
responsibilities in this issuance to other PSAs and the DoD Component heads. Assignment of
responsibilities in these DoD issuances to Military Department officials must be made through
the Secretaries of those Departments. DoD issuances assigning responsibilities to the Combatant
Commands must be coordinated with the CJCS.

       (2) Such documents must be fully coordinated in accordance with DoDI 5025.01.

      (3) This authority may only be further delegated to officials as specified in
DoDI 5025.01.

    c. Approve the Federal Register publication of documents that are not rules or significant
guidance documents, e.g., notices, orders, or non-significant guidance documents as defined by
E.O. 13891 and determined by the Office of Management and Budget, in accordance with
Administrative Instruction 102. Unless otherwise restricted by law, this authority may be further
delegated only in writing to subordinate officials at or above the level of a general officer/flag
officer, Senior Executive Service member, or equivalent.



SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                             10
                                                              DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


    d. Communicate directly with other PSAs and the DoD Component heads, as necessary, to
carry out assigned responsibilities and functions, including transmitting requests for advice and
assistance. Communications to the Military Departments must be transmitted through the
Secretaries of the Military Departments or as otherwise provided in law or directed by the
Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the Combatant Commanders
must be in accordance with DoDD 5100.01.

    e. Communicate with other government officials, members of the public, and representatives
of foreign governments, as appropriate, in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions.
Communications with representatives and members of the Legislative Branch must be conducted
through the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs, except for
communications with the defense appropriations committees, which must be coordinated with
the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department
of Defense.

   f. Communicate with agencies of the Executive Branch and Congress on special access
programs. For all special access program matters, the CDAO must conduct communications
with agencies of the Executive Branch and Congress in accordance with DoDD 5205.07.

    g. Obtain reports and information, in accordance with DoDI 8910.01, as necessary, to carry
out assigned responsibilities and functions.

   h. Establish arrangements for DoD participation in non-DoD governmental programs for
which the CDAO is assigned primary DoD responsibility.

    i. Enter into support agreements and other types of memoranda of agreements or memoranda
of understanding, in accordance with DoDI 4000.19, the February 13, 2020 Deputy Secretary of
Defense Memorandum, or other applicable DoD policy, as required for the effective performance
of responsibilities and functions assigned to the CDAO.

   j. Exercise the functions of a head of agency with respect to appropriate acquisition activities
pursuant to Section 808 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2021.

    k. Acts as an original classification authority for matters pertaining to assigned
responsibilities and functions up to Top Secret information, in accordance with E.O. 13526, E.O.
14110, and other applicable Presidential policies and guidance. This authority may not be
redelegated.




SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                          11
                                               DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


                           GLOSSARY
ACRONYM    MEANING

AI         artificial intelligence

CDAO       Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer
CJCS       Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
CPM        capability portfolio management

DoD CIO    Chief Information Officer of the Department of Defense
DoDD       DoD directive
DoDI       DoD instruction
DTM        directive-type memorandum

E.O.       Executive order

OCDAO      Office of the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer

PSA        Principal Staff Assistant

U.S.C.     United States Code
USD(A&S)   Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
USD(I&S)   Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
USD(R&E)   Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering




GLOSSARY                                                                     12
                                                           DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


                                      REFERENCES
Administrative Instruction 102, “Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) Federal Register (FR)
   System,” November 6, 2006, as amended
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegation of Authority for OSD Component
   Heads to Enter into Support Agreements,” February 13, 2020
DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major Components,”
   December 21, 2010, as amended
DoD Directive 5101.01, “DoD Executive Agent,” February 7, 2022
DoD Directive 5122.05, “Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs (ATSD(PA)),”
   August 7, 2017
DoD Directive 5144.02, “DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO),” November 21, 2014, as
   amended
DoD Directive 5205.07, “Special Access Program (SAP) Policy,” September 12, 2024
DoD Instruction 1400.25, Volume 250, “DoD Civilian Personnel Management System: Civilian
   Strategic Human Capital Planning (SHCP),” June 7, 2016
DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” December 16, 2020
DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended
DoD Instruction 5400.13, “Public Affairs (PA) Operations,” October 15, 2008
DoD Instruction 5400.17, “Official Use of Social Media for Public Affairs Purposes,”
   August 12, 2022, as amended
DoD Instruction 5405.03, “Development, Submission, and Approval of Proposed Public Affairs
   Guidance (PPAG),” February 18, 2016
DoD Instruction 5410.19, “Community Outreach Activities,” September 29, 2021
DoD Instruction 8910.01, “DoD Implementation of the Paperwork Reduction Act,” December 5,
   2022
Executive Order 13526, “Classified National Security Information,” December 29, 2009, as
   amended
Executive Order 13891, “Promoting the Rule of Law Through Improved Agency Guidance
   Documents,” October 9, 2019
Executive Order 14110, “Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial
   Intelligence,” October 30, 2023
Office of Management and Budget Memorandum M-19-23, “Phase 1 Implementation of the
   Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018: Learning Agendas, Personnel,
   and Planning Guidance,” July 10, 2019
Public Law 116-283, “William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for
   Fiscal Year 2021,” January 1, 2021
Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Artificial Intelligence Ethical Principles for the
   Department of Defense,” February 21, 2020
United States Code, Title 5
United States Code, Title 10, Section 113



REFERENCES                                                                                  13
                                             DoDD 5105.89, November 18, 2024


United States Code, Title 44, Section 3520




REFERENCES                                                               14
