                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 5000.56
                                                                                    July 9, 2010
                                               Incorporating Change 2, Effective August 26, 2020

                                                                                        USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:      Programming Geospatial-Intelligence (GEOINT), Geospatial Information and
              Services (GI&S), and Geodesy Requirements for Developing Systems

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5000.56 (Reference (a)) in
accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01 (Reference (b)) to update
policy, responsibilities, and procedures for the identification and funding of GEOINT
requirements for systems under development or upgrade consistent with DoDDs 5105.60 and
5000.01 and DoDI 5000.02 (References (c), (d), and (e)). All GI&S, imagery or geodesy data,
product, or services are components of GEOINT and, for the purposes of this Instruction, shall
hereafter be referred to as GEOINT.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. All acquisition programs relying on GEOINT data shall be designed to use standard
GEOINT data whose content, formats, and standards conform to those established by the
National System for Geospatial Intelligence (NSG) through community government processes.

    b. All acquisition programs shall make maximum use of standard military data and digital
databases provided by the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) and the NSG.
                                                                     DoDI 5000.56, July 9, 2010


    c. DoD Components shall consider the availability of NGA resources and the impact the use
of unique GEOINT data, products, or services may have on the cost, schedule, or performance of
system development or upgrades when unique GEOINT data, products, or services are required
in the conduct of the system’s operational mission profile.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and
Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (f)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective July 9, 2010.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   Glossary




Change 2, 08/26/2020                            2
                                                                      DoDI 5000.56, July 9, 2010


                                          ENCLOSURE 1

                                           REFERENCES


(a)      DoD Instruction 5000.56, “Programming Unique Mapping, Charting, and Geodesy
         (MC&G) Requirements for Developing Systems,” September 11, 1991 (hereby cancelled)
(b)      DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
         (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(c)      DoD Directive 5105.60, “National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA),” July 29, 2009
(d)      DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003, as amended
(e)      DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,” January 7, 2015,
         as amended
(f)      Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,” December
         20, 2019
(g)      DoD Information Technology Standards Registry1
(h)      Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3900.01C, “Position (Point and Area)
         Reference Procedures,” June 30, 2007
(i)      Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3901.01B, “Requirements for Geospatial
         Information and Services,” July 15, 2004
(j)      Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
         Associated Terms,” current edition




1
    https://disronline.disa.mil/


Change 2, 08/26/2020                             3                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                       DoDI 5000.56, July 9, 2010


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY
(USD(I&S)). The USD(I&S) shall:

   a. Carry out the assigned responsibilities for GEOINT, in accordance with Reference (b).

   b. Adjudicate issues arising from this Instruction that cannot be resolved by direct NGA and
DoD Component negotiations in consultation with appropriate oversight organizations as
necessary.

   c. Recommend, when issues are adjudicated to require use of NGA resources, the DoD
Component transfer funds in the amounts determined through the adjudication process to the
appropriate NGA accounts.


2. DIRECTOR, NGA. The Director, NGA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I&S), shall:

    a. Evaluate support requirements for GEOINT proposed by a DoD Component and submit
the evaluation to the Head of the DoD Component and the USD(I&S) with recommendations.

    b. Through the GEOINT-Standards Working Group, develop, maintain, approve,
disapprove, and set standards and specifications for data, products, and services that satisfy the
coordinated and validated community GEOINT requirements. GEOINT standards are
documented in the DoD Information Technology Standards Registry (Reference (g)).
Developers shall normally document which GEOINT standards and specifications are required
after Milestone B.

    c. Develop a schedule to satisfy the GEOINT requirements profile developed in paragraph
3.b. of this enclosure.

   d. Provide integrated, interoperable GEOINT, categorized into data domains (aeronautical,
maritime, topographic, names, and elevation) and data densities (global, regional, local, and
specialized), for all applicable emerging and future systems under development or upgrade.

    e. Determine and isolate the cost to the NGA of satisfying unique GEOINT requirements.
All applicable expense elements shall be considered, including, but not limited to, ramp-up costs
such as hiring and training of new personnel, site preparation, equipment procurement, and fixed
plant investment as well as all costs for maintenance of full operating capability. Phase-down
costs that would result from program cancellation or program completion should also be
identified. General purpose items (e.g., mainframe computers) not specifically dedicated to a
unique GEOINT requirement shall be funded by the NGA and shall not be considered in this



Change 2, 08/26/2020                             4                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 5000.56, July 9, 2010


process. Marginal costs in these categories specifically assessable as system-unique in
application shall initially be funded by the DoD Component that is the system-proponent,
pending formal transfer of funds to the NGA.

     f. Determine, for system-proponent and USD(I&S) coordination, the best value source for
satisfying the unique GEOINT requirement by comparing the cost of in-house NGA resources
with the cost of contracting with the commercial sector, another DoD Component, or with a
trusted foreign co-producer. If contracted or assigned to a co-producer, the Director, NGA, shall
still retain the responsibility for satisfying the requirement.

    g. Within the developing system’s engineering and manufacturing development (EMD)
phase and before its Milestone C decision, prepare for USD(I&S) coordination a memorandum
of agreement (MOA) with the appropriate system-proponent. The MOA must identify the
annual GEOINT profiles, the attendant costs to be borne by the system-proponent and, if
appropriate, the date at which the unique GEOINT data, product, or service would be categorized
as a standard GEOINT data, product, or service, with any subsequent service funded within
NGA’s baseline. Implementing signatories shall be the Director, NGA, and the Head of the DoD
Component that is the system-proponent.

    h. Establish and maintain a list of DoD systems whose GEOINT requirements are satisfied
by unique GEOINT products and services. The list shall have three parts:

       (1) Pre-policy systems with unique requirements that are an established part of the NGA
baseline funding.

        (2) Systems with unique requirements that are less than the funding threshold specified
in section 2 of Enclosure 3.

        (3) Systems with unique requirements that are above the funding threshold specified in
section 2 of Enclosure 3.

   i. Request USD(I&S) adjudication, as appropriate, of issues arising from definition or
funding of GEOINT data, products, or services.


3. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS, EXCLUDING DoD FIELD ACTIVITIES AND
THE DIRECTOR, NGA. The Heads of the DoD Components, excluding the DoD Field
Activities and the Director, NGA, shall:

   a. For each system requiring unique GEOINT data, products, or services, consult with the
Director, NGA, as to the requirements definition and all subsequent phases.

    b. By Milestone B, have a system or subsystem model or prototype demonstrated in a
relevant environment (technology readiness level 6, which is system prototype demonstrated in a
relevant environment) for systems requiring unique GEOINT to achieve their key performance
parameters in order to determine type and quantities of GEOINT required for operational



Change 2, 08/26/2020                            5                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 5000.56, July 9, 2010


employment. This is critical to ensure that adequate GEOINT production, storage, and
dissemination capabilities are available to support system fielding and employment. Consult
with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Combatant Commanders, as appropriate,
to examine deployment alternatives and to forecast area requirements and data density associated
with initial fielding and full operational deployment. A GEOINT requirements profile shall be
formulated based on the projected area requirements, projected data density levels, and the new
system’s unit acquisition rate and delivery schedule. Force planning must be considered as the
deployment role of each system assessed.

    c. Program for all system GEOINT marginal costs based on NGA-provided estimates. The
programmed funding shall be explicitly identified with the system development program element
in all program and budget exhibits. Sufficient funding shall be maintained to provide for
necessary start-up, continuation, and phase-down of NGA efforts, pending formal biennial
transfer of funds to the NGA.

    d. Within the developing system’s EMD phase and before the Milestone C decision, enter
into an MOA with the NGA covering GEOINT support profiles and the attendant costs.

    e. Ensure proper consideration is given to GEOINT topics during component acquisition
review and in the development process.

   f. Request USD(I&S) adjudication, as appropriate, of issues arising from definition or
funding of GEOINT data, products, or services.

   g. For each system requiring unique GEOINT data, products, or services, consult with the
Director, NGA, as to the proper classification of the data, product, or service provided.




Change 2, 08/26/2020                           6                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 5000.56, July 9, 2010


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. Navigation and positioning systems shall be based on NGA standards for conversion into the
Universal Transverse Mercator System, Military Grid Reference System, and the World
Geodetic System 1984 datum or follow-on system. In accordance with Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 3900.01C (Reference (h)), developers shall coordinate with
NGA to ensure systems utilizing position information meet necessary standards and accuracies.

2. If a system requires unique GEOINT resources (data, products, or services) which require
NGA resources in a Future Year Defense Program in excess of $3.3 million (based on fiscal year
(FY) 2009 constant dollars) for research, development, testing, and evaluation or more than
$10.0 million (based on FY 2009 constant dollars) for procurement, then the system must fund
the total costs for provision of the data, products, or services. A system requiring unique
GEOINT resources below the threshold shall compete for the NGA’s baseline resources in the
normal program objectives memorandum process. Use of this process is independent of
designation of a program as an acquisition program or a major system under References (c) and
(d). New or upgraded systems that require an increase in coverage above the standard GEOINT
data, products, or services or require an increase, regardless of the amount, in production are not
covered by this Instruction and shall compete for existing NGA production resources through
procedures outlined in CJCSI 3901.01B (Reference (i)).

3. GEOINT requirements are derived from the initial capabilities document (ICD) for Milestone
A and subsequent milestones, as provided in Reference (d). Consequently, as an “infrastructure
support” component, GEOINT requirements are subject to consideration at all system milestone
reviews. Using the GEOINT requirements defined in the ICD, the NGA and applicable DoD
Component(s) shall identify any unique GEOINT data, product, or service requirements and
program funding support for the identified unique requirements.

4. Biennial transfers of funds will usually commence between milestones B and C and will
continue as specified in an MOA. A program budget decision will make a transfer of funds for
each 2-year budget cycle. If NGA cost estimates are revised subsequent to the transfer, it shall
be NGA’s responsibility to notify the USD(I&S) to make the appropriate changes.

5. If a new system is a functional replacement or otherwise affects force structure, the associated
GEOINT requirement may supplant or truncate earlier requirements, reducing the net marginal
cost to the NGA, and thus may reduce funding requirements levied on the system-proponent
DoD Component.




Change 2, 08/26/2020                             7                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                       DoDI 5000.56, July 9, 2010


                                             GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CJCSI        Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction


DoDD         DoD directive
DoDI         DoD instruction


EMD          engineering and manufacturing development


FY           fiscal year


GEOINT       geospatial intelligence
GI&S         geospatial information and services

ICD          initial capabilities document


MOA          memorandum of agreement


NGA          National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
NSG          National System for Geospatial Intelligence


USD(I&S) Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

GEOINT. Defined in the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference (j)).

GI&S. The collection, information extraction, storage, dissemination, and exploitation of
geodetic, geomagnetic, imagery (both commercial and national source), gravimetric,
aeronautical, topographic, hydrographic, littoral, cultural, and toponymic data accurately
referenced to a precise location on the Earth’s surface. Geospatial services include tools that
enable users to access and manipulate data, and also include instruction, training, laboratory
support, and guidance for the use of geospatial data. GEOINT is used in military planning,
training, and operations, including navigation, mission rehearsal, modeling, simulation, and
precise targeting.



Change 2, 08/26/2020                             8                                    GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 5000.56, July 9, 2010


NSG. Defined in Reference (c).

system-proponent. DoD Component assigned program management responsibilities for the
system’s acquisition.

unique GEOINT data, product, or service. Any GEOINT data, product, or service that is not
already provided through NGA gateway, Defense Logistics Agency, or under a negotiated
agreement with user.




Change 2, 08/26/2020                          9                                 GLOSSARY
