                            Department of Defense
                               DIRECTIVE
                                                                               NUMBER 3600.01
                                                                                      May 2, 2013
                                                              Incorporating Change 1, May 4, 2017

                                                                                              USD(P)

SUBJECT:      Information Operations (IO)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive 3600.01 (Reference (a)) in accordance with the authority in DoD
Directive 5111.1 (Reference (b)) and, pursuant to the authority and guidance in Secretary of
Defense Memorandum (Reference (c)), updates established policy and assigned responsibilities
for IO.

   b. Updates IO definitions.

  c. Directs the establishment of the Information Operations Executive Steering Group (IO
ESG).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands
(CCMDs), the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD
(hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. IO will be the principal mechanism used during military operations to integrate,
synchronize, employ, and assess a wide variety of information-related capabilities (IRCs) in
concert with other lines of operations to effect adversaries’ or potential adversaries’ decision-
making while protecting our own.

    b. IRCs constitute tools, techniques, or activities employed within a dimension of the
information environment (IE) that can be used to achieve a specific end at a specific time and
place. IRCs can include, but are not be limited to, a variety of technical and non-technical
activities that intersect the traditional areas of electronic warfare, cyberspace operations, military
                                                                      DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013
information support operations (MISO), military deception (MILDEC), influence activities,
operations security (OPSEC), and intelligence.

    c. The development and management of individual IRCs will be the responsibility of various
DoD Components and will be brought together at a specific time and in a coherent and integrated
fashion for use against adversaries and potential adversaries in support of military operations.

   d. DoD IO will be synchronized with information and influence activities of other U.S.
Government (USG) organizations to ensure consistency across USG activities in the IE.

   e. DoD IO will be coordinated and, as practicable, integrated with related activities
conducted by allied nations and coalition partners.

    f. Consistent with existing statutory requirements and manpower polices, Service and joint
IO forces must be an appropriate and cost effective total force mix of active and reserve military
personnel, government civilian personnel, and contracted support.

    g. IO will be included across Active and Reserve Components, and government civilian
professional education curriculums to foster an understanding of IO and IRCs across all ranks
and positions within DoD.

    h. IO tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs); technologies; and lessons learned will be
shared among DoD Components and, as practicable, with allied nations and coalition partners to
fully facilitate the synchronization, integration, and effectiveness of IO while reducing
redundancies in capabilities across the DoD.

    i. IO will be integrated into joint exercises and joint training, security cooperation guidance
for theater planning, communication strategy, and deliberate and contingency planning.

    j. DoD IO programs and activities will incorporate an explicit means of assessing the results
of operations in relation to expectations.

    k. DoD IO activities will not be directed at or intended to manipulate audiences, public
actions, or opinions in the United States and will be conducted in accordance with all applicable
U.S. statutes, codes, and laws.

    l. DoD IO information gathering programs and activities will be coordinated and
deconflicted with DoD intelligence activities as set forth in DoD Directive S-5200.37 (Reference
(d)) and DoD 5240.1-R (Reference (e)). Human-derived information gathering activities in
support of IO will remain separate from authorized HUMINT and related intelligence activities.

   m. All DoD IO activities will be conducted in accordance with CJCS Instruction 3121.01B
(Reference (f)).

    n. The IO ESG will serve as the primary coordination forum within DoD to inform,
coordinate, and resolve IO issues among the DoD Components and, as appropriate, deconflict IO
issues as they are represented in established DoD policy and programmatic decision forums. The
IO ESG’s organization, membership, policies, and procedures will be established in a separate
DoD Instruction.

Change 1, 05/04/2017                             2
                                                              DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013



4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective May 2, 2013.




                                            Ashton B. Carter
                                            Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 05/04/2017                        3
                                                                 DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 3600.01, “Information Operations (IO),” August 14, 2006, as amended
    (hereby cancelled)
(b) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” December 8,
    1999
(c) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Strategic Communication and Information Operations
    in the DoD (U),” January 25, 2011
(d) DoD Directive S-5200.37, “Management and Execution of Defense Human Intelligence
    (HUMINT) (U),” February 9, 2009, as amended
(e) DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components That
    Affect United States Persons,” December 7, 1982, as amended
(f) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3121.01B, “Standing Rules of Engagement
    /Standing Rules for the Use of Force for US Forces, and the Law of Armed Conflict
    (LOAC),” June 13, 2005
(g) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Changing the Term Psychological Operations
    (PSYOP) to Military Support information Operations (MISO) (U),” December 3, 2010
(h) “Trilateral Memorandum of Agreement signed by the Department of Defense, the
    Department of Justice and the Intelligence Community Regarding Computer Network
    Attack and Exploitation Activities,” May 9, 2007
(i) Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, "DoD Dictionary of Military and
    Associated Terms," current edition




Change 1, 05/04/2017                          4                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P):

    a. Serves as the Principal Staff Advisor (PSA) to the Secretary of Defense for oversight of
IO in the DoD. In this capacity, the USD(P):

       (1) Is the primary coordination point of contact for DoD Components and other USG
organizations for issues related to IO.

       (2) Is the single point of fiscal and program accountability for IO.

       (3) Links OSD, Joint, and Service IO policies, capabilities, and programs.

       (4) Fully integrates IO with national and DoD strategy and planning functions.

   b. Provides policy oversight, guidance, and advice for DoD IO to include providing policy
guidance on IO force development and employment.

   c. Coordinates within OSD, the Joint Staff, and the Military Services to address the
Combatant Commanders’ IO requirements, which includes the development of IRCs, ensuring
adequate test and evaluation resources, and ensuring IRC integration across the CCMDs.

   d. In coordination with the DoD Components responsible for the individual IRCs:

       (1) Oversees, coordinates, and assesses the efforts of DoD Components to plan, program,
and develop IRCs for use in the IE.

       (2) Assesses the effectiveness of the IRCs as part of IO in operational applications.

   e. Provides IO policy guidance for all phases of operations planning, including security
cooperation.

   f. Establishes DoD policy on MISO matters in accordance with Secretary of Defense
Memorandum (Reference (g)), and reviews and approves all CCMD MISO programs to be
conducted during peacetime or in contingencies short of declared war.

    g. Establishes and oversees DoD policy regarding the coordination of IO conducted by DoD
Components with other USG organizations in support of U.S. national security strategy and
policy in accordance with Reference (g), so specific information objectives, target audiences,
themes, and actions are synchronized. This specifically includes coordinating MISO policy,
plans, and programs with other USG departments, agencies, and activities.




Change 1, 05/04/2017                            5                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013


    h. Establishes and oversees DoD policy regarding the coordination and, where practicable,
the integration of IO efforts with allied and coalition partners.

    i. Coordinates with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)) on policies for the establishment and maintenance of professionally trained and
educated Service and joint IO forces. These forces will consist of a total force mix as described
in paragraph 3f above the signature of this directive.

    j. Develops standardized fiscal methodologies for IRCs in accordance with Reference (c)
and in coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)), the Under
Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense
(USD(C)/CFO), and the Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation (DCAPE). As part
of this responsibility, the USD(P) will maintain procedures to ensure fiscal accountability for IO
as well as the individual IRCs.

   k. Conducts programmatic assessments of DoD IO in coordination with DCAPE.

   l. As one of the co-chairs of the IO ESG, establishes and maintains the IO ESG.

    m. Assists in the development of Joint Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations (JEMSO)
policy and coordinates with the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
Logistics (USD(AT&L)) and Commander, United States Strategic Command
(USSTRATCOM) regarding the development, acquisition, and employment of JEMSO
capabilities used to support IO.

    n. Coordinates with the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs to ensure
that DoD IO is consistent with the policy established in this directive and that DoD IO is not
directed at or intended to manipulate U.S. audiences, public actions, or opinions and is conducted
in accordance with all applicable U.S. statutes, codes, and laws.

   o. In coordination with the USD(I):

        (1) Provides policy oversight for OPSEC; MILDEC; deconfliction of DoD IO and
intelligence activities; and the development, acquisition, and integration of MILDEC capabilities
used to support IO.

       (2) Provides input to the DoD OPSEC program as required.

       (3) Coordinates on intelligence related matters that support the integration of IRCs used
during military operations.

        (4) Assists in the development and maintenance of a DoD instruction on policy for
intelligence support to IO, information gathering activities, and IE characterization.




Change 1, 05/04/2017                            6                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013


2. USD(I). The USD(I):

  a. Facilitates coordination of IO activities within the Intelligence Community consistent with
Memorandum of Agreement (Reference (h)).

   b. Serves as the OSD program management lead for the DoD OPSEC and MILDEC
programs.

   c. In coordination with the USD(P):

       (1) Develops and oversees the implementation of policy for intelligence support to IO,
information gathering activities, and IE characterization.

       (2) Establishes and oversees the implementation of policies and procedures for the
conduct of DoD OPSEC and MILDEC as warfighting enablers and military competencies, and
the coordination and deconfliction of DoD IO and intelligence activities.

       (3) Coordinates on intelligence related matters that support the integration of IRCs used
during military operations.

        (4) Develops, approves, and maintains DoD instruction on policy for intelligence support
to IO, information gathering activities, and IE characterization.


3. USD(AT&L). In partnership with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the
USD(AT&L) researches IRCs affecting IO and coordinates these activities with the USD(P).


4. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R):

   a. Develops policies for the establishment and maintenance of professionally trained and
educated Military Service and joint IO forces in coordination with the USD(P) and the
Secretaries of the Military Departments. These forces will consist of a total force mix.

    b. Develops and distributes polices for the establishment and maintenance of professionally
trained and educated Military Service and joint IO forces in collaboration with USD(P).


5. USD(C)/CFO. The USD(C)/CFO:

    a. In coordination with the USD(P) and DCAPE, develops standardized fiscal methodologies
for IRCs when applied to support IO. Included in this activity is the maintenance of procedures
to ensure fiscal accountability for IO as well as the individual IRCs when they are employed in
support of IO.




Change 1, 05/04/2017                            7                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013


    b. Requires all organizations conducting MISO to capture costs for MISO as a separate and
distinct entity from other IO-related costs.


6. DCAPE. The DCAPE:

   a. As appropriate, reviews IO programs, costs, and effectiveness.

   b. In coordination with the USD(P) and USD(C)/CFO, develops standardized fiscal
methodologies for IRCs and IO activities.


7. DOD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

    a. Assign responsibilities and establish procedures within their respective DoD Components
to implement this directive.

   b. Support IO planning, coordination, operations, and deconfliction within DoD Components
and other USG organizations.


8. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

   a. In coordination with the USD(P) and CJCS, implement joint IO policy and doctrine and
develop, plan, and program IO into the full spectrum of military operations.

   b. Develop and implement Service component IO policy, doctrine, and TTPs that are
compatible with DoD and joint IO policy and doctrine.

   c. Provide education and training to meet IO military and civilian force development goals to
meet joint IO requirements.

   d. Provide intelligence oversight training to IO staffs and units in accordance with
Reference (e).

    e. Share IO TTPs and technologies with DoD Components and, when release of such
information and technologies is permitted, allied and coalition partners.

    f. Establish and oversee policies that provide for IO reporting and assessment as well as the
integration of individual IRCs to meet Combatant Commanders’ needs and objectives.

   g. In accordance with Reference (c) and in coordination with the USD(P), USD(C)/CFO,
and DCAPE, annually provide comprehensive Service inputs required to ensure fiscal
accountability for IO as well as individual IRCs.




Change 1, 05/04/2017                            8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013



9. CJCS. The CJCS:

   a. Serves as the joint IO proponent. Functions as the oversight authority for IO policy
execution within the CCMDs and joint task forces.

   b. Develops procedures for a professionally trained and educated joint IO force in
coordination with the USD(P&R) and USD(P).

    c. Emphasizes the importance of including IO as an instrumental part of military operations
through the development and validation of joint IO doctrine.

   d. Validates IO needs through the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System.

   e. Incorporates IO into all military planning efforts, including joint exercises and training.

   f. Serves as the joint proponent for MILDEC and OPSEC.

    g. Ensures all joint education, training, plans, and operations are consistent with joint IO
policy, strategy, and doctrine.

   h. Evaluates the joint IO education and training system and conducts assessments of IO to
ensure the requirements of the Combatant Commanders are met.

   i. Consistent with Reference (c), oversees the Joint IO Warfare Center as a Chairman’s
Controlled Activity.

    j. As one of the co-chairs of the IO ESG, establishes and maintains Joint Staff participation
in the IO ESG.

   k. Ensures coordination and deconfliction of joint IO and intelligence activities in all
operational planning and execution.

  l. Establishes a framework for sharing TTPs as well as lessons learned among DoD
Components and allied and coalition partners.


10. COMBATANT COMMANDERS. The Combatant Commanders:

   a. Utilize IO as the principal mechanism to integrate, synchronize, employ, and adapt all
IRCs in the IE to accomplish operational objectives against adversaries and potential adversaries.

   b. Develop, plan, program and assess IO as well as IRC execution in support of IO during all
phases of military engagement and at all levels of war.




Change 1, 05/04/2017                             9                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013


    c. In coordination with the USD(P) and CJCS, identify in advance and seek, as appropriate,
the delegated authorities required for employing IRCs in support of IO across the full range of
military operations.

   d. Identify and prioritize IO needs on their respective integrated priority lists.

    e. Integrate IO into joint exercises and training, security cooperation guidance for theater
planning, and deliberate and contingency planning.

    f. Develop and share IO lessons learned through written and oral assessments communicated
to other DoD Components and allied and coalition partners as appropriate.

    g. Ensure that joint IO staffs and units under CCMD command and control have received
intelligence oversight training in accordance with Reference (e).

   h. Ensure coordination and deconfliction of CCMD IO and intelligence activities in all
operational planning and execution.


11. COMMANDER, USSTRATCOM. The Commander, USSTRATCOM, is the joint
proponent for JEMSO and computer network operations. In addition to the responsibilities
outlined in section 10 of this enclosure and in coordination with the USD(P) and through the
CJCS, the Commander, USSTRATCOM, coordinates JEMSO, space operations, and cyberspace
operations in support of IO.


12. COMMANDER, U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND (USSOCOM). The
Commander, USSOCOM, is the joint proponent for MISO. In addition to the responsibilities
outlined in sections 8 and 10 of this enclosure and in coordination with the USD(P) and through
the CJCS, the Commander, USSOCOM, coordinates joint force MISO in support of IO.


13. DIRECTORS OF THE DEFENSE AGENCIES. The Directors of the Defense Agencies:

   a. Integrate IO into joint exercises, training, and deliberate and contingency planning.

    b. Develop and share IO lessons learned through written and oral assessments communicated
to other DoD Components and, as applicable, allied and coalition partners.




Change 1, 05/04/2017                             10                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013


                                        GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


CAPE             Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
CCMD             Combatant Command
CJCS             Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


DCAPE            Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation


IE               information environment
IO               information operations
IO ESG           Information Operations Executive Steering Group
IRC              information related capability


JEMSO            Joint Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations


MILDEC           military deception
MISO             military information support operations


OPSEC            operations security


PSA              Principal Staff Advisor
PSYOP            psychological operations

TTP              tactics, techniques, and procedures


USD(AT&L)  Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(C)/CFO Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
           Department of Defense
USD(I)     Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)     Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USD(P&R)   Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USG        United States Government
USSOCOM    United States Special Operations Command
USSTRATCOM United States Strategic Command


Change 1, 05/04/2017                     11                           GLOSSARY
                                                                     DoDD 3600.01, May 2, 2013



                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are proposed for inclusion in the next edition of the DoD
Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Reference (j)).

IE. An environment that is an aggregate of individuals, organizations, and systems that collect,
process, disseminate, or act on information.

IO. The integrated employment, during military operations, of information-related capabilities in
concert with other lines of operations to influence, disrupt, corrupt, or usurp the decision making
of adversaries and potential adversaries while protecting our own.

IO force. A force consisting of units, staff elements, and individual military professionals in the
Active and Reserve Components, and DoD civilian employees who conduct or directly support
the integration of IRCs against adversaries and potential adversaries during military operations as
well as those who train these professionals.

IRC. A capability that is a tool, technique, or activity employed within a dimension(s) of the
information environment that can be used to achieve a specific end(s).




Change 1, 05/04/2017                        12                                GLOSSARY
