                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION
                                                                             NUMBER 3002.03
                                                                                    July 15, 2013
                                                           Incorporating Change 1, April 26, 2016

                                                                                              USD(P)

SUBJECT: DoD Personnel Recovery - Reintegration of Recovered Personnel

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction, in accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD)
5111.1 (Reference (a)) and Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (b)):

   a. Implements policy established in DoDD 3002.01 (Reference (c)).

   b. Incorporates and cancels DoD Instruction (DoDI) 2310.4 (Reference (d)).

    c. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedural guidelines for
reintegrating recovered DoD personnel in accordance with Reference (c).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in
this instruction as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY

    a. The purpose of reintegration is to gather critical information from recovered persons while
protecting their health and welfare. This allows the return of the recovered person, physically
and emotionally healthy, to duty as expeditiously as possible. The Military Departments and
Services, geographic Combatant Commands (GCCs), and United States Special Operations
Command (USSOCOM) must be prepared to conduct reintegration of DoD personnel
immediately following an isolating event. The GCCs, in coordination with the Military
Departments, will conduct reintegration in situations where an isolated person was required to
survive, evade, resist, or escape. The GCCs will determine criteria for conducting reintegration
for other isolating events.
                                                                    DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


    b. Military personnel will undergo reintegration until released by the responsible commander
and after recommendation by the reintegration team chief in a Phase II or III reintegration. DoD
civilians who have committed to participate in reintegration as part of their performance plan
will also participate until released. DoD civilians without such a performance plan provision and
CAAF, will participate in Phase I and will be offered the opportunity to continue participation in
the reintegration process in accordance with DoDI 3020.41 (Reference (e)). Third country
national (TCN) CAAF who have the appropriate reintegration provisions in their contracts may
also be offered the opportunity to participate in the reintegration process.

    c. Reintegration is complete when the commander responsible for the recovered person
approves the reintegration team chief’s recommendation for return to the appropriate Military
Department for duty status determination (may include full duty status, further medical care,
discharge, etc.). A determination that reintegration is complete may be made during any phase
of the process.

    d. Medical triage and survival, evasion, resistance, and escape (SERE) psychological
assessment of the recovered person should occur prior to any debriefings. Debriefings to satisfy
intelligence, operational, investigative, and SERE information requirements must be prioritized
and conducted as early as possible and as required.

    e. Intelligence debriefings will be conducted during reintegration of DoD personnel. Phases
II and III intelligence debriefings must be conducted in accordance with DoDD S-5200.37
(Reference (f)).

    f. In accordance with section 1506 of Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (g)),
the Secretary concerned will withhold from personnel files, as privileged information, any
debriefing reports provided by missing persons returned to the United States that were obtained
under a promise of confidentiality made for the purpose of ensuring the fullest possible
disclosure of information.

    g. SERE debriefings will be conducted for the sole purpose of garnering lessons learned and
to help prevent or prepare for future isolating events.

    h. If other U.S. Government (USG) organizations require access to the recovered person or
information, the GCCs, Military Departments, and USSOCOM will facilitate access in
accordance with National Security Presidential Directive 12, Annex 1 (Reference (h)).

    i. If federal law enforcement organizations require access to the recovered person or
information to obtain the necessary evidence for criminal prosecution of the captors, the GCCs,
Military Departments, and USSOCOM will facilitate access.

    j. When consistent with applicable laws and regulations, DoD may provide post-isolation
support for non-DoD personnel following an isolating event in accordance with Reference (g).
When providing post-isolation support to a non-DoD person, DoD will be in a supporting role to
the lead federal agency or allied or coalition government. Post-isolation support for non-DoD
personnel may be subject to section 1535 of Title 31, U.S.C. (Reference (i)).



Change 1, 04/26/2016                            2
                                                                  DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013




4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the Internet
from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. Administrative changes were made to this issuance to:

   a. Implement DoDD 5111.10 (Reference (j)), which assigns personnel recovery to the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low Intensity Conflict
(ASD(SO/LIC)).

   b. Update organizational titles and references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction: is effective July 15, 2013.




                                                James N. Miller
                                                Under Secretary of Defense for Policy

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   4. The Mitchell Center
Glossary




Change 1, 04/26/2016                           3
                                                                                                    DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


ENCLOSURE 1: REFERENCES ...................................................................................................5

ENCLOSURE 2: RESPONSIBILITIES .........................................................................................6

     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)) ............................................6
     ASD(SO/LIC) ............................................................................................................................6
     USD(P&R) .................................................................................................................................7
     ASSISTANT TO THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS
       (ATSD(PA)) .........................................................................................................................7
     DoD COMPONENT HEADS....................................................................................................8
     SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS........................................................8
     SECRETARY OF THE NAVY ...............................................................................................11
     CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF ...............................................................11
     COMMANDERS OF THE GCCs ...........................................................................................11
     COMMANDER, USSOCOM ..................................................................................................12
     COMMANDER, UNITED STATES TRANSPORTATION COMMAND
       (USTRANSCOM)..............................................................................................................13

ENCLOSURE 3: PROCEDURES ................................................................................................14

ENCLOSURE 4: THE. MITCHELL CENTER ...........................................................................18

GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................19

     PART 1: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS................................................................19
     PART 2: DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................20




Change 1, 04/26/2016                                                  4                                                     CONTENTS
                                                                DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” December 8,
    1999
(b) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,” November 30,
    2006
(c) DoD Directive 3002.01, “Personnel Recovery in the Department of Defense,” April 16,
    2009, as amended
(d) DoD Instruction 2310.4, “Repatriation of Prisoners of War (POW), Hostages, Peacetime
    Governmental Detainees and Other Missing or Isolated Personnel,” November 21, 2000
    (hereby cancelled)
(e) DoD Instruction 3020.41, “Operational Contract Support (OCS),” December 20, 2011
(f) DoD Directive S-5200.37, “Management and Execution of Defense Human Intelligence
    (HUMINT) (U),” February 9, 2009, as amended
(g) Title 10, United States Code
(h) National Security Presidential Directive 12, Annex-I, “United States Policy on Personnel
    Recovery and the Prevention of U.S. Hostage-Taking and Other Isolating Events,”
    December 4, 2008
(i) Title 31, United State Code
(j) DoD Directive 5111.10, “Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low
    Intensity Conflict (ASD(SO/LIC)),” March 22, 1995, as amended
(k) DoD Instruction 1300.18, “Department of Defense (DoD) Personnel Casualty Matters,
    Policies, and Procedures,” January 8, 2008, as amended
(l) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DoD Personnel Recovery Strategic
    Communication Guidance,” March 4, 2008
(m) Personnel Recovery Security Classification Guide, June 15, 2011
(n) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegation of Secretary of Defense Authorities to
    Carry Out Personnel Recovery Reintegration and Post-Isolation Support Activities,”
    January 3, 2013
(o) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 4120.02C, “Assignment of Movement and
    Mobility Priority,” December 22, 2011
(p) Title 5, United States Code
(q) DoD 5400.11-R, “Department of Defense Privacy Program,” May 14, 2007
(r) Joint Publication 1-02, “Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated
    Terms,” current edition




Change 1, 04/26/2016                         5                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                     DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P):

   a. Serves as the DoD policy lead for all reintegration and post-isolation support activities.

    b. Oversees the implementation of sections 1510 through 1513 of Reference (g) and DoD
policy, strategy, and plans for recovering and reintegrating isolated personnel.

  c. Serves as the OSD principal staff assistant responsible for overseeing the activities of the
ASD(SO/LIC), consistent with Reference (j).

    d. Designates a Military Department responsible for providing Phase III reintegration
services, if required, for non-Service affiliated DoD civilian personnel and additional personnel
as authorized by applicable law and regulations, including:

       (1) Contractors authorized to accompany the force (CAAF).

       (2) Other government agency personnel.

       (3) U.S. citizens who choose to accept post-isolation support.

        (4) Subject to Secretary of Defense approval, military or civilian officers or employees
of an allied or coalition partner of the United States, or other foreign nationals in accordance
with section 1056a of Reference (g).

    e. Ensures reintegration and post-isolation support preparation efforts, education, and
training keep pace with changes in the global operating environment.


2. ASD(SO/LIC). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), the ASD(SO/LIC):

   a. Develops reintegration and post-isolation support policy and strategy and oversee their
operational implementation.

   b. Oversees implementation of DoD reintegration and post-isolation support efforts to
provide consistency with DoD policy objectives.

    c. Provides policy direction to the DoD Components and prepares to assist reintegration of
isolated DoD personnel by diplomatic or civil means.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                            6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


    d. Establishes and maintains liaison, as necessary, with the DoD Components and other
relevant governmental agencies during execution of reintegration and/or post-isolation support
plans.

    e. Coordinates with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)) to update and refine policy, as required, to synchronize reintegration and casualty
assistance efforts more effectively.

   f. Assists other federal agencies and partner nations, consistent with applicable laws and
regulations, with reintegration and post-isolation support policies to increase their capacity to
support a national personnel recovery system.

    g. Coordinates preparation, planning, execution, and adaptation of reintegration and post-
isolation support activities with USG department and agency partners.

    h. Ensures reintegration and post-isolation support preparation efforts, education, and
training keep pace with changes in the global operating environment.


3. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R):

    a. Develops core standards for the assignment, training, and duties of Service casualty
assistance officers (CAOs) in accordance with DoDI 1300.18 (Reference (k)) to respond more
effectively to the needs of the family of isolated DoD personnel and support operational recovery
efforts.

   b. Coordinates with the ASD(SO/LIC) to update and refine casualty assistance policies, as
required, to synchronize casualty assistance and reintegration efforts.

    c. Ensures reintegration and post-isolation support preparation efforts, education, and
training keeps pace with changes in the global operating environment.


4. ASSISTANT TO THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS (ATSD(PA)).
The ATSD(PA):

    a. Supports the responsible DoD component command or the USG lead agency throughout
the reintegration of DoD personnel or post-isolation support of others when appropriate, in
accordance with Annex D of the Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (l)).

   b. Supports Service and Combatant Command public affairs (PA) offices and Joint
Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA) to guide and assist Service casualty affairs offices for
family member support during reintegration and post-isolation support.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                              7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


    c. Supports the responsible lead agency with the posture of limited or no media exposure of
recovered non-DoD personnel or their respective families until the GCC or Service determines
increased exposure is appropriate.


5. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

   a. Ensure reintegration and post-isolation support preparation efforts, education, and training
keep pace with changes in the global operating environment.

    b. Must be prepared to conduct interoperable, mutually cooperative, and interdependent
reintegration or post-isolation support with USG department and agency partners and to leverage
interagency capabilities to facilitate reintegration of DoD personnel whenever necessary.

    c. Develop inter-Service and interagency support agreements, memorandums of
understanding (MOUs), and other coordination procedures, as required, to support a national
personnel recovery system and other DoD components in accomplishing their reintegration and
post-isolation support responsibilities.

   d. Ensure all other debriefing records and materials are classified and protected in
accordance with Personnel Recovery Security Classification Guide (Reference (m)) and
Department, Service, or Combatant Command regulations and procedures.

    e. Synchronize reintegration and post-isolation support guidance and doctrine developed by
the DoD Components with this issuance.

   f. Take the necessary steps to ensure that DoD civilians will participate in reintegration.


6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In addition to the responsibilities
in section 5 of this enclosure, and subject to applicable laws and regulations, the Secretaries of
the Military Departments:

   a. Are responsible for Phase III reintegration of:

       (1) The Service members in their respective Military Department.

        (2) DoD civilians, CAAF, or other non-DoD persons who are identified by the GCCs
during Phases I and II. If a GCC identifies a lead Service component for Phase I or II
reintegration of a DoD civilian, CAAF, or other non-DoD person, then the GCC will recommend
to the USD(P) which Service is responsible for Phase III reintegration if required.

    b. In coordination with GCCs, develop and implement, when required, a plan that provides
for the reintegration or post-isolation support of recovered personnel. Provide the reintegration
concept of operation biennially through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the
ASD(SO/LIC). At a minimum, plans will:



Change 1, 04/26/2016                             8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013



       (1) Direct GCC components to be prepared to support GCC Phases I and II reintegration
requirements.

       (2) Specify the Phase III location(s). Services may share facilities to maximize
resources.

       (3) Identify Phase III reintegration team requirements including:

           (a) Personnel requirements.

           (b) Specific reintegration training requirements.

   c. Develop a consistent approach in accordance with section 1506 of Reference (g) and
Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (n)).

   d. Rehearse reintegration plans as required.

   e. Prepare and issue supporting policies and guidance that implement this instruction and
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff instructions.

    f. Establish an official representative to contact, advise, and maintain communications with
the isolated individual’s designated next-of-kin or others as necessary. The Military Department
or Service may designate the Service CAO with this responsibility. Ensure CAOs are aware of
the reintegration process and have the requisite skills and training.

    g. Establish and maintain guidance for industry partners who provide CAAF and work under
a contract resourced from Service funds. This guidance will detail the Service’s expectations
when a CAAF receives reintegration support from the DoD. This guidance is necessary to help
ensure the integrity of the reintegration process and better support those who are tending to the
mental and physical welfare of CAAF.

    h. Will be prepared to fund costs associated with the Phase I and II reintegration of
recovered personnel. Military Departments will be prepared to fund post-isolation support
activities in the event that the recovered person is not affiliated with the DoD. These costs may
include travel, billeting, security, medical treatment determined to be necessary, uniforms,
civilian clothing, sundry items, and other GCC-directed items or activities associated with
reintegration.

    i. Subject to Service plans, will be prepared to fund costs associated with the Phase III
reintegration of recovered personnel.

   j. Subject to Service plans, will be prepared to facilitate the transportation and billeting of
next of kin and others identified to the Phase III reintegration site. In coordination with the
GCC, will be prepared to facilitate the transportation and billeting of Phase III reintegration team
members, next of kin, and others identified to the Phase II reintegration site, if required.



Change 1, 04/26/2016                              9                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013



    k. Will be prepared to provide Phase III team members to observe Phase II reintegration
activities to provide a coordinated transition between Phases II and III.

    l. Designate specific installations as suitable processing locations and develop reintegration
contingency plans. Services may share Phase III facilities and develop joint contingency plans to
use resources more efficiently. Ensure these installations provide adequate debriefing facilities,
security and logistical support, and medical facilities. Report all reintegration locations to
ASD(SO/LIC) and JPRA.

   m. Maintain sufficient numbers of SERE-certified psychologists to support reintegration.

   n. Establish and maintain a mechanism to identify and track SERE certified psychologists
within the Service.

   o. Ensure reintegration team members are trained on reintegration and post-isolation support
processes and procedures.

    p. Ensure policies and procedures are in place to identify and track personnel who have been
trained on reintegration team responsibilities in accordance with Reference (c).

    q. Provide sufficient legal personnel to advise recovered personnel who are authorized to
received legal assistance and the Service reintegration team on legal issues, rights, and benefits
during all phases of reintegration and post-isolation support processing.

    r. Provide reintegration-trained and faith-group appropriate Service chaplains, in
coordination with the respective Service casualty assistance offices, to ensure recovered
personnel and family members, regardless of faith, have the opportunity for the religious
ministration and personal counseling of their choice.

    s. Transfer all Phase III reintegration data to JPRA and ensure that no copies of documents
will be retained pursuant to paragraph 3 of Enclosure 3 of this instruction.

    t. Coordinate with ATSD(PA), the Services, the theater reintegration team chiefs, PA
representatives, appropriate defense contractor PA offices, and ASD(SO/LIC) and JPRA to
ensure consistency of messaging.

     u. As required, establish and maintain MOUs with the Department of the Navy for
uniformed military personnel to participate in the longitudinal medical evaluation study provided
at the Robert E. Mitchell Center for Prisoner of War Studies (see Enclosure 3), referred to in this
instruction as the “Mitchell Center.” Will be prepared to provide funding for admittance and
participation of DoD civilian and CAAF who were held captive, hostage, or detained. The cost
of temporary duty expenses of uniformed military personnel is the responsibility of the Service.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                            10                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


7. SECRETARY OF THE NAVY. In addition to the responsibilities in sections 5 and 6 of this
enclosure, the Secretary of the Navy will, consistent with applicable laws and regulations,
facilitate the inclusion of recovered DoD personnel who volunteer to participate in the
longitudinal post-captivity study provided by the Mitchell Center. This facilitation will include
entering into appropriate MOUs regarding the Mitchell Center as described in this instruction.


8. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. In addition to the responsibilities in
section 5 of this enclosure, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

    a. Facilitates the operational and policy-level coordination and implementation of this
instruction among the Office of the USD(P), ASD(SO/LIC), Combatant Commands, and the
Military Departments.

    b. Provides military guidance and direction to the JPRA through the Joint Staff J-7. JPRA,
as a Chairman’s Controlled Activity in accordance with Reference (c), will:

      (1) Assist, facilitate, and provide functional expertise to the DoD Components to
implement this instruction.

       (2) Ensure Joint guidance and doctrine are compatible with this issuance.

       (3) Develop supporting instructions and other guidance to support this instruction.


9. COMMANDERS OF THE GCCs. In addition to the responsibilities in section 5 of this
enclosure, the Commanders of the GCCs:

    a. In coordination with the Military Departments and Services and other GCCs as required,
develop and implement a plan that provides for the reintegration or post-isolation support of
recovered personnel.

   b. Develop a consistent approach in accordance with References (g) and (n).

    c. Develop procedures to take custody of DoD personnel recovered through diplomatic or
civil means.

    d. Develop PA guidance for dissemination of information, collateral support from
component commanders, and procedures to notify Military Department and Service offices of
primary responsibility (OPRs), ASD(SO/LIC), JPRA, casualty affairs offices, PA offices, and
chaplains’ offices of an isolating event and subsequent key events in the life cycle of isolation,
including initial recovery.

   e. Allow Phase III team members to observe Phase II reintegration activities to provide a
coordinated transition between Phases II and III.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                             11                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


    f. Provide for the transfer of all data collected from Phase I and II reintegration (including all
notes, recordings, videos, transcripts, maps, charts, question sets, drawings, etc.) to the Service-
designated reintegration team chief if Phase III reintegration is required. If reintegration ends at
Phase I or II, the GCC will send all data collected from Phase I and II reintegration to JPRA.

   g. Identify an office to serve as the central coordinator and point of contact for all processing
preparations and activities at the theater transition point. This will include processes for a
smooth transition from initial reception to the theater transition point.

    h. Request that the Secretary of Defense designate a transportation priority of no less than
1B1 (as defined in Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 4120.02C (Reference (o)).
Provide for the transport of the recovered person and other designated personnel throughout the
reintegration and post-isolation support process to the designated Phase III location in
accordance with section 1056a of Reference (g).

    i. In cases where federal law enforcement is pursuing prosecution following an isolating
event, confer with appropriate USG department and agency liaisons to ensure law enforcement
personnel can conduct debriefings to collect, store, and transfer information in a manner
consistent with evidentiary standards.

    j. Provide for chaplains or other religious personnel as required at the theater processing
locations to meet the spiritual needs of recovered personnel and their families.

    k. Designate a lead component Service for reintegration and post-isolation support of DoD
civilians, CAAF, and non-DoD personnel who are not affiliated with a Service.


10. COMMANDER, USSOCOM. In addition to the responsibilities in section 5 of this
enclosure and due to USSOCOM’s unique character as both a Combatant Command and a joint
force provider, the Commander, USSOCOM:

    a. Coordinates Phases I and II of reintegration operations of recovered USSOCOM
personnel with the corresponding GCC that has responsibility for the area in which the isolating
event took place. Phase III reintegration for military personnel will be executed by the
individual’s parent Military Department in coordination with USSOCOM. Although the affected
GCC and Service must plan for and execute reintegration operations for special operations forces
personnel, USSOCOM’s participation in the planning, preparation, execution, and adaptation of
reintegration is imperative to safeguard the interests of the recovered person(s) and of the theater
and USSOCOM commanders.

    b. Designate an OPR for all USSOCOM-relevant reintegration and post-isolation support
actions.

       (1) The USSOCOM OPR will establish a reintegration cell to coordinate its reintegration
procedures with each GCC and Military Department reintegration program OPR to ensure
resource deconfliction.



Change 1, 04/26/2016                             12                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013



       (2) USSOCOM will publicize, in applicable USSOCOM issuances, responsibilities
delineating internal (USSOCOM) and external (USSOCOM component commands)
requirements, as they apply to representation within the USSOCOM reintegration cell.


11. COMMANDER, UNITED STATES TRANSPORTATION COMMAND
(USTRANSCOM). In the event that the Secretary of Defense designates a transportation priority
of 1B1 (as defined in Reference (o)) for recovered personnel, the Commander, USTRANSCOM,
in addition to the responsibilities in section 5 of this enclosure, will coordinate with the
responsible GCC to provide transportation for recovered personnel, reintegration team members,
and other designated individuals.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                         13                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. The reintegration process consists of three distinct phases with flexible timelines, dependent
on the specific needs of the recovered person and the operational mission.

    a. Phase I (Combatant Command): This phase begins immediately following the recovered
person’s return to friendly control.

    b. Phase II (Combatant Command): Phase II begins when the recovered person arrives at a
theater transition location. Phase II is complete when the Phase II reintegration team chief
transfers the reintegration mission to the Phase III reintegration team chief.

   c. Phase III (Service): Phase III is Service-level reintegration.

2. In Reference (n), the Secretary of Defense delegated to the Secretaries of the Military
Departments and GCCs the authorities to provide reintegration activities and post-isolation
support activities, subject to the following reporting responsibilities:

    a. The Secretary or Combatant Commander carrying out activities under this delegation
will notify the USD(P) through the ASD(SO/LIC) not later than 24 hours after the
commencement of such activities, and where feasible, will provide notification at least 24 hours
prior to commencement of such activities.

    b. The Secretary or Combatant Commander carrying out such activities under this delegation
will submit a report summarizing such activities and the cost thereof to the USD(P) through the
ASD(SO/LIC) not less than 60 days after commencing such activities until all such activities are
completed.

3. Organizational disposition of SERE debriefing materials will comply with the following
procedures:

    a. SERE debriefings will be conducted for the sole purpose of garnering lessons learned and
to help prevent or prepare for future isolating events. DD Form 2810, “Personnel Recovery
Debriefing Statement,” will be used to describe to recovered persons the disclosure restrictions
that will apply to their debriefing statements.

    b. At the completion of reintegration, all SERE debriefing materials (recordings, videos,
transcripts, maps, charts, question sets, drawings, etc.) must immediately be forwarded to the
JPRA through appropriate command channels.

   c. Upon acknowledgement of receipt of SERE debriefing materials by JPRA, all retained
copies of the materials will be destroyed and no copies will be maintained or shared with other
organizations.



Change 1, 04/26/2016                            14                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013



    d. Within 90 days of receipt of SERE debriefing materials, JPRA will release a SERE
lessons learned report for use by the GCCs, Military Departments, and other interested
organizations. Submitting GCCs and applicable Military Departments will have access to
original materials. JPRA will approve all other requests for access to original materials on a
case-by-case basis.

4. The respective Military Department or Service or DoD agency will prepare a personnel
processing file (PPF) in coordination with the respective Military Service Casualty Office when
notified an individual is isolated, missing, or captured, in accordance with Title 5, U.S.C.
(Reference (p)) and DoDD 5400.11-R (Reference (q)). The same procedure will apply in the
case of DoD civilians and will be performed by their parent Military Department or Service or
DoD agency. In the case of DoD CAAF, the Military Service Casualty Office of the parent
Military Department or Service or DoD agency, working in conjunction with the contractor’s
company, the Department of State, and the DoD, will prepare the PPF.

5. Each Military Department or Service will establish an official representative to contact,
advise, and maintain communications with the isolated individual’s designated next-of-kin or
others as necessary. The Military Department or Service may designate the Service CAO with
this responsibility. Ensure CAOs are aware of the reintegration process and have the requisite
skills and training. The Service’s official representative will be prepared to:

   a. Facilitate and coordinate DoD or other USG contact with the designated next-of-kin, the
family of isolated personnel, or others as required, and advise the relevant DoD components of
USG engagement with the family or others close to the isolated person.

   b. Provide information on the anticipated reintegration process to the designated next-of-kin
and others, as necessary.

6. JPRA, as a Chairman’s Controlled Activity in accordance with Reference (c), will:

    a. Assist, facilitate, and provide functional expertise to the DoD Components to implement
this instruction.

   b. Ensure joint guidance and doctrine are compatible with this issuance.

    c. Develop and implement an education and training strategy to assist the Military
Departments and GCCs in developing, obtaining and maintaining the requisite procedures,
programs, skills, and knowledge to execute Phases I, II, and III reintegration operations,
respectively. Upon request, provide training on reintegration or post-isolation support roles,
responsibilities, and procedures to other government organization personnel.

    d. Develop and implement an education and training curriculum to provide CAOs with the
requisite skills to support the family members of isolated DoD personnel throughout the
personnel recovery effort.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                            15                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                      DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


   e. Develop doctrine, supporting instructions, and other guidance to:

       (1) Support the DoD Personnel Recovery Debriefing and Reintegration Program.

       (2) Facilitate post-isolation support for non-DoD personnel.

      (3) Support the synchronization of efforts between DoD and other relevant USG
elements.

    f. Provide assistance and guidance to Military Departments and GCCs in regard to all
reintegration intelligence debrief activities, including:

        (1) Review and establish procedures, as required, to synchronize and coordinate
intelligence efforts within the Intelligence Community.

       (2) Review reintegration plans and procedures to ensure trained and certified intelligence
debriefers are identified for use during reintegration in accordance with Reference (f).

       (3) Ensure JPRA has intelligence personnel who are certified in accordance with
Reference (e) and trained and prepared to advise and assist in reintegration debriefing activities.

    g. Train and certify SERE certified psychologists who will assist the theater and Service
reintegration team chiefs in managing the reintegration and post-isolation support process while
ensuring recovered personnel receive proper psychological decompression.

   h. Train SERE debriefers to serve on theater and Service reintegration teams.

    i. Release a SERE lessons learned report for use by the GCCs, Military Departments and
other involved organizations within 90 days of receipt of SERE debriefing materials.

   j. Maintain the lessons learned for personnel recovery reintegration within the Joint Lessons
Learned Information System (JLLIS).

7. In coordination with the Military Departments and Services (and other GCCs as required),
GCCs will develop and implement a plan that provides for the reintegration or post-isolation
support of recovered personnel. At a minimum, the GCC will:

   a. Identify the personnel composition of the GCC reintegration team and personnel support
required for the Phase I and II activities.

  b. Specify if the phase will be conducted from a fixed location or deployable package. A
GCC may share facilities with another GCC or Military Department to maximize resources.

   c. Ensure reintegration and post-isolation support plans are rehearsed and exercised as
required.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                             16                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                      DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


   d. Utilize procedures provided by the Services to identify and track the SERE certified
psychologists within the GCC.

   e. Identify specific reintegration and post-isolation support training requirements.

    f. Identify requirements for legal and administrative personnel to advise recovered
personnel.

   g. Identify chaplain support requirements.

   h. Identify command and control structure and coordination lines of communications.

   i. Identify procedures to support non-DoD personnel for post captivity support.

   j. Identify requirements for subject matter expert to assist in preservation of technical data
from survival equipment.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                            17                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                       DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


                                          ENCLOSURE 4

                                   THE MITCHELL CENTER


1. The Mitchell Center documents whether there are captivity-related physical or mental
problems with recovered isolated personnel who were held captive as a POW, hostage, or
detainee. It is a unique institution that holds the only longitudinal study of the long-term effects
of captivity. The study’s information is gathered by way of extensive annual evaluations, the
results of which are released to the patient for routine health maintenance and to document
disabilities that may be compensable through the Veterans Affairs system. Although the
Mitchell Center’s longitudinal study is a U.S. Navy program, administrative mechanisms exist
for including all DoD personnel who were former prisoners of war (POWs), hostages, or
detainees.

2. If recovered DoD personnel were held as POWs, hostages, detainees, or in some other type of
illegal captivity, the reintegration team chief will make a determination, in consultation with the
Director of the Mitchell Center, on the applicability and utility the Mitchell Center may have to
the former captive. Should the recovered person’s case fall within the scope of the Mitchell
Center, the reintegration team chief will counsel the recovered person on the benefits of
attending the Mitchell Center and recommend their participation.

3. Pursuant to this instruction, the Departments of the Army and Air Force may establish MOUs
with the Department of the Navy and use Military Interdepartmental Purchase Requests to pay
for the temporary duty expenses of their uniformed personnel to travel to the Mitchell Center.
The Secretary of the Military Department that was responsible for the Phase III reintegration of a
recovered DoD civilian or CAAF may also grant a Service designation that enables the Mitchell
Center study to include those personnel who are not affiliated with a Military Department. The
Secretary of Defense may also grant this designation to other U.S. citizens or foreign nationals
who have been recovered. The Department of the Navy pays for all medical evaluations.

4. The Mitchell Center provides annual evaluations that shape the care the recovered person
receives through his or her primary care provider, but does not treat personnel on site. The
Mitchell Center also conducts studies that focus on long-term health issues of former captives.
The Mitchell Center’s annual evaluation may last approximately one to three days.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                             18                                 ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                 DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


                                          GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ASD(SO/LIC)      Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low
                 Intensity Conflict
ATSD(PA)         Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs


CAAF             contractors authorized to accompany the force
CAO              casualty assistance officer


DoDD             DoD directive
DoDI             DoD instruction


GCC              geographic Combatant Command


JLLIS            Joint Lessons Learned Information System
JPRA             Joint Personnel Recovery Agency


MOU              memorandum of understanding


OPR              office of primary responsibility


PA               public affairs
POW              prisoner of war
PPF              personnel processing file


SERE             survival, evasion, resistance, and escape


TCN              third country national


USG              U.S. Government
U.S.C.           United States Code
USSOCOM          United States Special Operations Command
USTRANSCOM       United States Transportation Command
USD(P)           Under Secretary of Defense for Policy



Change 1, 04/26/2016                         19                                  GLOSSARY
                                                                         DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013


USD(P&R)            Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness


                                      PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.

CAAF. Contractor personnel, including all tiers of subcontractor personnel, authorized to
accompany the force in applicable contingency operations and have been afforded CAAF status
through letter of authorization. CAAF generally include all U.S. citizens and TCN employees not
normally residing within the operational area whose area of performance is in the direct vicinity of
U.S. forces and who routinely are co-located with U.S. forces (especially in non-permissive
environments). In some cases, Combatant Command subordinate commanders may designate
mission-essential HN or LN contractor employees (e.g., interpreters) as CAAF. CAAF includes
contractors identified as contractors deploying with the force outside the boundaries and territories of
the United States, and meeting the qualifications and training requirements of Reference (o). CAAF
status does not apply to contractor personnel in support of contingencies within the boundaries and
territories of the United States.

decompress (also decompression). A process designed to assist recovered personnel in
transitioning from isolation to full duty status while minimizing any lasting harmful
psychological side effects. The process has four major components:

   Enabling recovered personnel to regain the ability to predict upcoming events in their
environment thereby establishing a perception of control.

   Allowing recovered personnel to tell their story repeatedly in a healthy manner in order to
understand the isolating event fully, gain a sense of mission completion, and help their peers by
providing mission essential information.

    Normalizing the reactions to the isolating event.

    Developing action plans that will assist recovered personnel as they face the challenges of
readjusting to normal work, family, and social life.

isolated person. U.S. military, Department of Defense civilians, and contractor personnel (and
others designated by the President or Secretary of Defense) who are separated from their unit (as
an individual or a group) while participating in a U.S.-sponsored military activity or mission and
are, or may be, in a situation where they must survive, evade, resist, or escape as defined in Joint
Publication 1-02 (Reference (r)).

Service Phase III reintegration team. The Service reintegration teams are responsible for the
Phase III reintegration process in order to care for properly, protect, debrief, decompress, and
return formerly isolated personnel to their unit. Responsible Military Departments may request
support from JPRA and other Military Departments to augment reintegration teams as
circumstances dictate. Teams are trained in accordance with DoD, Joint Staff, and Military
Department standards. The Service Phase III reintegration team will consist, at a minimum, of:


Change 1, 04/26/2016                              20                                      GLOSSARY
                                                                     DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013



   O-6 Service reintegration team chief.

   SERE debriefer.

   Intelligence debriefer.

   SERE certified psychologist.

   Public affairs representative.

   Casualty affairs representative.

   Legal counsel.

   Chaplain.

   Transcribers.

   Appropriate medical personnel.

   Others as required by circumstances.

post-isolation support. DoD support to recovered non-DoD personnel, beginning immediately
following the recovery of an isolated person and consisting of debriefing, decompression,
providing for physical and mental health, and returning them to their normal life or providing
follow-on care as expeditiously as possible. The term “post-isolation support” is differentiated
from “reintegration” due to the possible impact of Reference (i) and additional staffing and
permission requirements for “post-isolation support” activities.

recovered personnel. Persons who have been returned alive following an isolating event.

reintegration. The DoD process of coordinating multiple activities with a recovered person,
while protecting their health and welfare, with the goal of returning a physically and emotionally
healthy DoD member to duty as expeditiously as possible. Reintegration includes, but is not
limited to, medical care, decompression, and debriefing.

SERE certified psychologist. A psychologist specifically trained to manage captivity and
reintegration stresses of recovered personnel, facilitate decompression, and oversee the
debriefing processes.

theater reintegration team. A theater reintegration team is responsible for the reintegration
process and post-isolation support process in order to properly care for, protect, debrief,
decompress, and return formerly isolated personnel to their unit or transfer them to their Service
for Phase III reintegration. Teams are trained in accordance with DoD, Joint Staff, and Service
standards. The Phase II theater reintegration team will consist, at a minimum, of:



Change 1, 04/26/2016                            21                                   GLOSSARY
                                                DoDI 3002.03, July 15, 2013



   O-6 theater reintegration team chief.

   SERE debriefer.

   Intelligence debriefer.

   SERE psychologist.

   Public Affairs representative.

   Casualty affairs representative.

   Legal counsel.

   Chaplain.

   Transcriber.

   Appropriate medical personnel.




Change 1, 04/26/2016                       22                 GLOSSARY
