                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 5210.45
                                                                             November 14, 2008
                                                  Certified Current Through November 14, 2015
                                              Incorporating Change 3, Effective August 27, 2020

                                                                                      USD(I&S)

SUBJECT: Personnel Security Policies and Procedures for Sensitive Cryptologic Information in
         the National Security Agency/Central Security Service

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5210.45 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction (DoDI) in
accordance with the guidance in DoDI 5025.01 (Reference (b)) and updates policies and
responsibilities under the authority in DoDD 5143.01 (Reference (c)).

    b. Prescribes the personnel security policies and procedures for the protection of sensitive
cryptologic information at the National Security Agency (NSA)/Central Security Service (CSS)
in accordance with Chapter 23 of title 50, U.S. Code (Reference (d)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

    a. The Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments (including the Coast
Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security in
agreement with that Department), the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff,
the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the
Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the
Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

   b. All persons employed by, detailed, or assigned to the NSA/CSS, and to all other persons
under the security cognizance of the Director, NSA/Chief, CSS, (DIRNSA/CHCSS) for initial or
continued access to sensitive cryptologic information.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.
                                                               DoDI 5210.45, November 14, 2008



4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. All military and civilian positions of the NSA/CSS are designated as critical sensitive
positions and will be treated as such in connection with investigative, personnel security
eligibility, and employment matters in accordance with DoDD 5100.20 (Reference (e)).

    b. All NSA/CSS employees, contractors, military assignees, and others with similar
affiliations with the NSA/CSS must maintain personnel security eligibility for Sensitive
Compartmented Information (SCI) for access to sensitive cryptologic information. Eligibility for
SCI is a mandatory condition of employment, detail, or assignment at the NSA/CSS.

   c. All contracts requiring access to SCI will conform to the requirements of the Federal
Acquisition Regulation (Reference (f)).

    d. No person shall be employed by, detailed, or assigned to the NSA/CSS, and no person
shall have access to classified information of the NSA/CSS, unless:

      (1) He or she has been the subject of a full field investigation in connection with such
employment, detail, or assignment, and is cleared for access to classified information, and

        (2) Such employment, detail, assignment, or access to classified information is clearly
consistent with the national security. Any doubt shall be resolved in favor of the national
security.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)), in accordance
with Reference (c), shall exercise oversight of the DIRNSA/CHCSS regarding personnel security
policies and procedures for the protection of SCI.

    b. The DIRNSA/CHCSS, under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S) and as
a designated head of an element of the Intelligence Community (IC), in accordance with
Executive Order (E.O.) 12333 (Reference (g)), shall:

        (1) Establish, direct, and administer all aspects of the NSA/CSS personnel security
program in accordance with Director of National Intelligence personnel security policies
consistent with E.O. 12968 (Reference (h)), and contained in DoD Manual 5200.02 (Reference
(i)) and IC Directive Number 704 (Reference (j)) as appropriate.

        (2) Prepare implementing guidance for the NSA/CSS personnel security program to meet
the standards set forth in this Instruction.

    c. The DIRNSA/CHCS shall appoint one or more boards of appraisal to perform duties as
directed in Reference (d).



Change 3, 08/27/2020                             2
                                                           DoDI 5210.45, November 14, 2008




6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 2.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the USD(I&S) in accordance with Public Law 116-92
(Reference (k)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective November 14, 2008.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Procedures
Glossary




Change 3, 08/27/2020                          3
                                                            DoDI 5210.45, November 14, 2008



                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5210.45, “Personnel Security in the National Security Agency,” May 9,
      1964 (hereby canceled)
(b)   DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended
(c)   DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
      (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(d)   Subchapter III, Chapter 23, title 50 of United States Code
(e)   DoD Directive 5100.20, “National Security Agency/Central Security Service (NSA/CSS),”
      January 26, 2010
(f)   Federal Acquisition Regulation, subpart 4.4, current edition
(g)   Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” as amended
(h)   Executive Order 12968, “Access to Classified Information,” as amended
(i)   DoD Manual 5200.02, “Procedures for the DoD Personnel Security Program (PSP),”
      April 3, 2017
(j)   Intelligence Community Directive Number 704, “Personnel Security Standards and
      Procedures Governing Eligibility for Access to Sensitive Compartmented Information and
      Other Controlled Access Program Information,” October 1, 2008
(k)   Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,” December
      20, 2019
(l)   DoD Instruction 5210.91, “Polygraph and Credibility Assessment (PCA) Procedures,”
      August 12, 2010, as amended
(m)   Office of Management and Budget Memorandum, “Reciprocal Recognition of Existing
      Personnel Security Clearances,” December 15, 2005
(n)   Office of Management and Budget, M-06-21, “Reciprocal Recognition of Existing
      Personnel Security Clearances,” July 17, 2006
(o)   Executive Order 13467, “Reforming Processes Related to Suitability for Government
      Employment, Fitness for Contractor Employees, and Eligibility for Access to Classified
      National Security Information,” June 30, 2008
(p)   Executive Order 13526, “Classified National Security Information,” December 29, 2009, as
      amended
(q)   Executive Order 12951, “Release of Imagery Acquired by Space-Based National
      Intelligence Reconnaissance Systems,” February 22, 1995
(r)   Section 2011, title 42 of United States Code




Change 3, 08/27/2020                          4                        ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 5210.45, November 14, 2008


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                         PROCEDURES


1. Personnel security procedures are set forth in Reference (i) and requirements for SCI access
are set forth in Reference (j).


2. When the DIRNSA/CHCSS is the cognizant head of an IC element, the following apply:

   a. Employment

        (1) New employees will not be provided access to sensitive cryptologic information until
a favorably adjudicated Single-Scope Background Investigation (SSBI) and an expanded scope
polygraph have been completed in accordance with all applicable requirements and standards set
forth in Reference (j) and in DoD Instruction 5210.91 (Reference (l)).

        (2) To assist in determining personnel security eligibility for initial SCI access, an
expanded scope polygraph examination shall be required of applicants for employment,
contractor employees, and any other affiliates requiring staff-type access. A periodic
counterintelligence scope polygraph will be required for assessment of eligibility for continued
SCI access. Failure to consent to a polygraph examination shall result in denial or revocation of
access to sensitive cryptologic information and termination of employment.

        (3) All persons requiring access to sensitive cryptologic information or to spaces where
sensitive cryptologic information is produced, processed, and/or stored must maintain personnel
security eligibility for SCI access by a favorably adjudicated SSBI, a Single-Scope Background
Investigation – Periodic Reinvestigation, or a Phased Periodic Reinvestigation, at the discretion
of the DIRNSA/CHSS. Reinvestigation is required every 5 years.

   b. Temporary Eligibility for SCI Access

         (1) In accordance with Reference (d), applicants for NSA/CSS employment may be
conditionally employed before the completion of an SSBI, but shall not be given access to
sensitive cryptologic information while so employed. This procedure also extends to contractor
employees, consultants, and other persons for whom the NSA/CSS has security cognizance for
initial or continued access to sensitive cryptologic information. In such cases, the NSA/CSS
shall determine the scope of the polygraph, as appropriate.

        (2) During national emergency situations and hostilities involving U.S. personnel, the
DIRNSA/CHCSS may temporarily waive the requirement for an SSBI if the Director determines
in writing that such action is advisable in the national interest and is clearly consistent with the
national security. This authority may be re-delegated at the discretion of the DIRNSA/CHCSS.
In such cases, and wherever possible, a polygraph of appropriate scope shall be completed and
favorably adjudicated prior to granting access to sensitive cryptologic information. In all cases,



Change 3, 08/27/2020                             5                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5210.45, November 14, 2008


priority shall be given to the completion of the SSBI, and all requirements met as set forth in
Reference (j) and in Reference (l).

    c. Boards of Appraisal. Reference (d) requires appointment of one or more boards of
appraisal to evaluate the loyalty and suitability of persons for access to classified information, in
those cases in which the DIRNSA/CHCSS determines that there is a doubt as to whether their
access to that information would be clearly consistent with the national security, and delineates
qualifications of the members.

   d. Appeal Procedures – Denial or Revocation of Access

       (1) Reference (j) establishes common appeals procedures for the denial or revocation of
SCI access. Reference (i) provides guidance on the requirements to process employees for
adverse action taken as a result of an adverse personnel security determination. Appeal
procedures are issued pursuant to References (h) and (j).

       (2) Notice to an NSA/CSS employee of the determination to revoke SCI access shall also
include information regarding the intent to remove him or her from employment with the
NSA/CSS for failure to meet a mandatory condition of employment; however, the notice of the
proposal to remove the employee shall be a separate document.

    e. Personnel Security Appeal Board. The establishment, membership, appointment,
responsibilities of board members, reports and recommendations, qualifications, and security
clearance requirements of board members is provided in References (d) and (i).

   f. Reciprocity

        (1) Office of Management and Budget Memorandum (Reference (m)) establishes
security clearance reciprocity standards and procedures for the Federal Government. Reference
(j) prescribes the reciprocity policy for SCI personnel security eligibility determinations.

       (2) DIRNSA/CHCSS shall accept personnel security eligibility determinations for SCI
granted by other agencies except those that meet one or more of the Permitted Exceptions to
Reciprocity guidelines contained in Office of Management and Budget Memorandum (Reference
(n)).

       (3) A person determined ineligible after due process for SCI access will remain ineligible
for a minimum of 1 year. However, IC element heads or their designees may waive this
requirement in individual cases.


3. Persons shall not be detailed or assigned to the NSA/CSS without agreement by
DIRNSA/CHCSS that its security requirements have been met. Persons detailed or assigned to
the NSA/CSS shall have clearance information available in appropriate security databases or
certified to the NSA/CSS through official security channels. When required clearance
information is not available in a security database, DIRNSA/CHCSS shall receive the following



Change 3, 08/27/2020                              6                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 5210.45, November 14, 2008


information from the appropriate IC element head or designee prior to a person being detailed or
assigned to the NSA/CSS:

   a. Written confirmation of the completion and favorable adjudication of a current SSBI.

    b. Written confirmation of a favorably adjudicated counterintelligence or expanded scope
polygraph examination (where authorized by the cognizant IC element head) completed within
the past 5 years, as set forth in Reference (k).


4. The DIRNSA/CHCSS shall reserve the right to conduct a counterintelligence scope polygraph
examination of any proposed detailee or assignee to the NSA/CSS whose IC element head does
not utilize the polygraph.


5. Employees who are eligible for SCI access shall be the subject of periodic reinvestigations
and may also be reinvestigated if at any time there is reason to believe that they may no longer
meet the established standards for access. Periodic reinvestigations shall be conducted in
accordance with the standards in Reference (j).


6. Cleared personnel who have access to sensitive cryptologic information are subject to
continuous evaluation in accordance with Executive Order 13467 (Reference (o)) to ensure that
they continue to meet standards of trustworthiness and reliability as set forth in Reference (j).




Change 3, 08/27/2020                            7                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 5210.45, November 14, 2008



                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CSS                   Central Security Service

DIRNSA/CHSS           Director, NSA/Chief, CSS
DNI                   Director of National Intelligence
DoDD                  DoD Directive
DoDI                  DoD Instruction

IC                    Intelligence Community

NSA                   National Security Agency

SCI                   sensitive compartmented information
SSBI                  single-scope background investigation

USD(I&S)              Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security

                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction only.

applicant. A person other than an employee who has received an authorized conditional offer of
employment for a position that requires access to classified information.

classified information. Information that has been determined pursuant to Executive Order 13526
(Reference (p)), or any successive order; Executive Order 12951 (Reference (q)), or any
successive order; or section 2011 of title 42, United States Code (Atomic Energy Act of 1954)
(Reference (r)), to require protection against unauthorized disclosure.

counterintelligence scope polygraph. A personnel security interview conducted with the aid of a
polygraph instrument, consisting of questions regarding espionage, sabotage, terrorism,
unauthorized disclosure, secret contacts with foreign entities, and damage of U.S. Government
information systems.

employee. A person employed by an agency within the intelligence community.

expanded scope polygraph. A personnel security interview conducted with the aid of a
polygraph instrument, consisting of questions regarding espionage, sabotage, terrorism,
unauthorized disclosure, secret contacts with foreign entities, damage of U.S. Government
information systems, serious detected and undetected crimes, illegal drug involvement, and
falsification of security forms.




Change 3, 08/27/2020                             8                            GLOSSARY
                                                               DoDI 5210.45, November 14, 2008


periodic reinvestigation. Currently cleared employees are required to review, update, and
resubmit his or her security clearance application for a reinvestigation. Periodic reinvestigations
are routinely required every 5 years for those with SCI clearances. A periodic reinvestigation is
done to ensure that an employee still meets the standards for SCI access. Reinvestigative
requirements are contained in Reference (j).

reciprocity. Acceptance by one IC element head of an SCI access-eligibility determination made
by another IC element head. It applies both to granting access when another IC element head has
approved access, and denying access when another IC element head has denied or revoked
access. Reciprocity does not include agency determinations of employment suitability. Nothing
precludes IC element heads or their designees from exercising authority to grant or to deny
access for reasons of operational necessity regardless of another IC element head’s decision.

SCI. Highly sensitive national security information to which access is based on a strict need-to-
know basis. The SCI system is a national intelligence community security program derived from
intelligence sources, methods, or analytical processes, which is required to be handled
exclusively within formal control systems established by the DNI. Reference (j) establishes the
personnel security standards for eligibility for SCI.

sensitive cryptologic information. Classified information pertaining to or resulting from the
activities and operations involved in the production of signals intelligence or the maintenance of
communications security.

SSBI. An investigation standard established for employees who require SCI access which is the
investigative basis for final clearance determinations. Investigative requirements are contained
in References (i) and (j).




Change 3, 08/27/2020                             9                            GLOSSARY
