                             Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 8260.05
                                                                                 July 7, 2011

                                                                                           CAPE

SUBJECT:     Support for Strategic Analysis (SSA)

References: (a) DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its
                Major Components,” December 21, 2010
            (b) DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),”
                March 18, 2008
            (c) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),”
                December 8, 1999
            (d) DoD Directive 5141.01, “Director, Program Analysis and Evaluation
                (PA&E),” March 16, 2006
            (e) DoD Instruction 8260.01, “Support for Strategic Analysis,” January 11, 2007
                (hereby cancelled)
            (f) DoD 8910.1-M, “Department of Defense Procedures for Management of
                Information Requirements,” June 30, 1998


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

   a. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities to provide SSA activities in accordance
with References (a) through (d).

   b. Supersedes and cancels Reference (e).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:
                                                                      DoDD 8260.05, July 7, 2011



   a. SSA products shall:

       (1) Support deliberations by DoD senior leadership on strategy and planning,
programming, budgeting, and execution system (PPBES) matters, including force sizing,
shaping, and capability development.

       (2) Provide a starting point for studies that support:

           (a) Development and implementation of defense strategy and policy.

           (b) The DoD PPBES.

   b. SSA products shall include:

       (1) Current baselines that reflect selected Combatant Commander (CCDR) plans and
approved force management decisions. These baselines shall NOT be used to evaluate CCDR
plans or force management decisions.

       (2) Near- to long-term scenarios, concepts of operation (CONOPS), forces, and baselines
based upon plausible challenges requiring DoD resources and capabilities.

    c. SSA product development shall be a collaborative and iterative process co-led, on behalf
of the Secretary of Defense, by the Offices of the Director, Cost Assessment and Program
Evaluation (DCAPE); the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)); and the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

       (1) Where appropriate, SSA product development shall be coordinated with other
Federal departments and agencies and with U.S. allies and partner countries.

       (2) Data shall be collected from the DoD Components to develop SSA products, and
relevant data shall be shared as appropriate.

       (3) Issues not resolved during SSA product development shall be referred to the
Secretary of Defense.

   d. Studies supporting the development and implementation of defense strategy, planning and
programming, and resourcing activities shall be archived by the DoD.

    e. Best business practices shall be instituted to ensure that SSA products are readily available
to the DoD Components.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure.




                                                 2
                                                                   DoDD 8260.05, July 7, 2011

6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The data collection activities described in this
Directive are exempt from licensing in accordance with subparagraphs C4.4.1., C4.4.2., and
C4.4.3. of DoD 8910.1-M (Reference (f)).


7. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Directive is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective upon its publication to the DoD Issuances
Website.




Enclosure
   Responsibilities
Glossary




                                               3
                                                                      DoDD 8260.05, July 7, 2011

                                          ENCLOSURE

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. DCAPE. The DCAPE, in addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, in
collaboration with the USD(P) and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and in coordination
with the Heads of the OSD and DoD Components, shall:

    a. Co-chair and serve as the executive secretary of the governance group that oversees SSA
activities.

   b. Maintain the currency of DoD issuances that implement this Directive.

    c. Identify and approve SSA baselines. This approval authorizes the use of these baselines
in the DoD PPBES.

    d. Build and maintain a repository to facilitate the management and distribution of SSA
products and associated data, as well as DoD Component studies and analyses supporting the
development and implementation of defense strategy, planning and programming, and resourcing
activities.


2. USD(P). The USD(P), in addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, in
collaboration with the DCAPE and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and in coordination
with the Heads of the OSD and DoD Components, shall:

   a. Co-chair the governance group that oversees SSA activities.

   b. Manage the development of, establish priorities among, and approve SSA scenarios.


3. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). The Director, DIA, under the
authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, in addition to
the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure and in coordination with the Heads of the OSD
and DoD Components, shall provide timely, integrated, and validated intelligence estimates
(including all-source data and CONOPS for non-U.S. state and non-state actors) for near- to
long-term SSA products. In this context, validation signifies approval of scenario assumptions
that are plausible, rather than constituting a DIA assessment of likely future events.


4. HEADS OF THE OSD AND DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the OSD and DoD
Components shall:

  a. Provide Component-specific data necessary to develop SSA products, as requested by the
DCAPE, the USD(P), or the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.



                                                 4                                   ENCLOSURE
                                                                      DoDD 8260.05, July 7, 2011



   b. Participate in the development of SSA products, ensuring OSD and DoD Component-
specific and joint capabilities and requirements are correctly represented.

   c. Continue to fund the development and maintenance of data and tools needed to produce
SSA products.

    d. Use SSA products as starting points for OSD and DoD Component-level studies to
support the development and implementation of defense strategy, to examine appropriate
statutory requirements and responsibilities, and to support PPBES activities.


5. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, in addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, in collaboration with the
DCAPE and the USD(P), and in coordination with the Heads of the OSD and DoD Components,
shall:

   a. Co-chair the governance group that oversees SSA activities.

   b. Manage the development of and approve SSA CONOPS and forces.

    c. Develop current baselines, in coordination with the CCDRs. The Joint Staff shall ensure
current baseline data is an accurate representation of selected CCDR plans and approved force
management decisions.

   d. Collect and make available to the DoD Components data on current operations to develop
SSA products that inform studies on the global demands on U.S. forces and capabilities.




                                                 5                                   ENCLOSURE
                                                                      DoDD 8260.05, July 7, 2011

                                             GLOSSARY

                          PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


CCDR   Combatant Commander
CONOPS concepts of operation


DCAPE       Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
DIA         Defense Intelligence Agency


PPBES       planning, programming, budgeting, and execution system


SSA         support for strategic analysis


USD(P)      Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


                                      PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

baseline. An integrated set of data used by the DoD Components as an agreed upon starting
point for studies supporting the development and implementation of defense strategy and DoD
PPBES activities. Baselines are produced and reviewed in an open, collaborative, and
transparent environment.

scenario. An account or synopsis of a projected course of action or events, with a focus on the
strategic level of warfare. Scenarios include information such as threat and friendly politico-
military contexts and backgrounds, assumptions, constraints, limitations, strategic objectives, and
other planning considerations. A scenario is intended to represent a plausible challenge and may
not reflect the most likely events.

strategic analysis. Analysis conducted to inform senior leader deliberations and other studies on
strategy, policy, and PPBES matters.




                                                 6                                   GLOSSARY
