                            Department of Defense
                               DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 6495.01
                                                                               January 23, 2012
                                                         Incorporating Change 6, March 26, 2025

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Sexual Assault Prevention and Response (SAPR) Program

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 6495.01 (Reference (a)),
pursuant to section 113 of Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (b)), to implement
DoD policy and assign responsibilities for the SAPR Program on prevention, response, and
oversight to sexual assault.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive:

   a. Applies to:

        (1) OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Inspector General of the DoD (IG DoD),
the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the
DoD (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

        (2) National Guard and Reserve Component members who are sexually assaulted when
performing active service, as defined in section 101(d)(3) of Reference (b), and inactive duty
training. Refer to Volume 1 of DoD Instruction (DoDI) 6495.02 (Reference (c)) for additional
SAPR and healthcare services provided to such personnel and eligibility criteria for Restricted
Reporting.

        (3) Military dependents 18 years of age and older who are eligible for treatment in the
military healthcare system, at installations in the continental United States and outside of the
continental United States (OCONUS), and who were victims of sexual assault perpetrated by
someone other than a spouse or intimate partner.

       (4) The following non-military personnel who are only eligible for LIMITED healthcare
(medical and mental health) services in the form of emergency care (see Glossary), unless
otherwise eligible to receive treatment in a military medical treatment facility. They will also be
offered the LIMITED SAPR services of a Sexual Assault Response Coordinator (SARC) and a
                                                                DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


SAPR Victim Advocate (VA) while undergoing emergency care OCONUS. Refer to Volume 1
of Reference (c) for any additional SAPR and healthcare services provided. These limited
healthcare and SAPR services shall be provided to:

           (a) DoD civilian employees and their family dependents 18 years of age and older
when they are stationed or performing duties OCONUS and eligible for treatment in the military
healthcare system at military installations or facilities OCONUS. Refer to Volume 1 of
Reference (c) for reporting options available to DoD civilians and their family dependents 18
years of age and older.

            (b) U.S. citizen DoD contractor personnel when they are authorized to accompany
the Armed Forces in a contingency operation OCONUS and their U.S. citizen employees (See
DoDI 3020.41 (Reference (d))). Refer to Volume 1 of Reference (c) for reporting options
available to DoD contractors.

        (5) Service members who are on active duty but were victims of sexual assault prior to
enlistment or commissioning. They are eligible to receive full SAPR services and either
reporting option.

    b. Does not apply to victims of sexual assault perpetrated by a spouse or intimate partner, or
military dependents under the age of 18 who are sexually assaulted. The Family Advocacy
Program (FAP), as described in DoDI 6400.06 (Reference (e)), provides the full range of
services to victims of domestic abuse or domestic violence, and to military dependents under the
age of 18 who are sexually assaulted.

   c. Supersedes all policy and regulatory guidance within the DoD not expressly mandated by
law that is inconsistent with its provisions, or that would preclude execution.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. This Directive and Reference (c) implement the DoD SAPR policy.

    b. The goal is a DoD free of sexual assault, through an environment of prevention, education
and training, response capability (defined in Reference (c)), victim support, reporting procedures,
and appropriate accountability that enhances the safety and well being of all persons covered by
this Directive and Reference (c).

   c. The SAPR Program shall:

       (1) Focus on the victim and on doing what is necessary and appropriate to support victim
recovery, and also, if a Service member, to support that Service member to be fully mission




Change 6, 03/26/2025                         2
                                                                DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


capable and engaged. The SAPR Program shall provide care that is recovery-oriented (see
Glossary).

      (2) NOT provide policy for legal processes within the responsibility of the Judge
Advocates General of the Military Departments provided in Chapter 47 of Reference (b) and the
Manual for Courts-Martial (Reference (f)) or for criminal investigative matters assigned to the
IG DoD.

    d. Standardized SAPR requirements, terminology, guidelines, protocols, and guidelines for
instructional materials shall focus on awareness, prevention, and response at all levels as
appropriate.

    e. The terms “Sexual Assault Response Coordinator (SARC)” and “SAPR Victim Advocate
(VA),” as defined in this Directive and Volume 1 of Reference (c), shall be used as standard
terms throughout the DoD to facilitate communications and transparency regarding SAPR
capacity. For further information regarding SARC and SAPR VA roles and responsibilities, see
Reference (c).

       (1) SARC. The SARC shall serve as the SINGLE POINT OF CONTACT for
coordinating appropriate and responsive care for sexual assault victims. SARCs shall coordinate
sexual assault victim care and sexual assault response when a sexual assault is reported. The
SARC shall supervise SAPR VAs, but may be called on to perform victim advocacy duties.

       (2) SAPR VA. The SAPR VA shall provide non-clinical crisis intervention and on-
going support, in addition to referrals for adult sexual assault victims. Support will include
providing information on available options and resources to victims.

   f. Command sexual assault awareness and prevention programs, as well as law enforcement
and criminal justice procedures that enable persons to be held accountable for their actions, as
appropriate, shall be established and supported by all commanders.

    g. An immediate, trained sexual assault response capability (defined in Reference (c)) shall
be available for each report of sexual assault in all locations, including in deployed locations.
The response time may be affected by operational necessities, but will reflect that sexual assault
victims shall be treated as emergency cases.

   h. Victims of sexual assault shall be protected from coercion, retaliation, and reprisal in
accordance with DoDD 7050.06 (Reference (g)).

    i. Victims of sexual assault shall be protected, treated with dignity and respect, and shall
receive timely access to comprehensive healthcare (medical and mental health) treatment,
including emergency care treatment and services, as described in this Directive and Volume 1 of
Reference (c).

    j. Emergency care shall consist of emergency healthcare and the offer of a sexual assault
forensic examination (SAFE) consistent with DoDI 6310.09 (Reference (h)) and refer to DD



Change 6, 03/26/2025                         3
                                                                 DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


Form 2911, “DoD Sexual Assault Medical Forensic Examination Report” and accompanying
instructions. The victim shall be advised that even if a SAFE is declined, the victim is
encouraged (but not mandated) to receive medical care, psychological care, and victim advocacy.

        (1) Sexual assault patients shall be given priority, and shall be treated as emergency
cases. A sexual assault victim needs immediate medical intervention to prevent loss of life or
suffering resulting from physical injuries (internal or external), sexually transmitted infections,
pregnancy, and psychological distress. Individuals disclosing a recent sexual assault shall, with
their consent, be quickly transported to the exam site, promptly evaluated, treated for serious
injuries, and then, with the patient’s consent, undergo a SAFE, pursuant to “Victim Centered
Care” of Reference (h) and refer to DD Form 2911 and accompanying instructions.

        (2) Sexual assault patients shall be treated as emergency cases, regardless of whether
physical injuries are evident. Patients’ needs shall be assessed for immediate medical or mental
health intervention pursuant to “Victim Centered Care,” and “Triage and Intake” of Reference
(h). Sexual assault victims shall be treated uniformly, consistent with “Victim Centered Care” of
Reference (h) and DD Form 2911 and accompanying instructions, regardless of their behavior
because when severely traumatized, sexual assault patients may appear to be calm, indifferent,
submissive, jocular, angry, emotionally distraught, or even uncooperative or hostile towards
those who are trying to help.

    k. Service members and their dependents who are 18 years of age or older covered by this
Directive (see subparagraph 2a.(4) and Reference (c)) who are sexually assaulted have two
reporting options: Unrestricted or Restricted Reporting. Unrestricted Reporting of sexual
assault is favored by the DoD. See Volume 1 of Reference (c) for additional information on the
DoD sexual assault reporting options and exceptions as they apply to Restricted Reporting.
Consult DoDD 5400.11 (Reference (i)) and DoD 6025.18-R (Reference (j)) for protections of
personally identifiable information solicited, collected, maintained, accessed, used, disclosed,
and disposed during the treatment and reporting processes. The two reporting options are as
follows:

        (1) Unrestricted Reporting allows an eligible person who is sexually assaulted to access
healthcare and counseling and request an official investigation of the allegation using existing
reporting channels (e.g., chain of command, law enforcement, healthcare personnel, the SARC).
When a sexual assault is reported through Unrestricted Reporting, a SARC shall be notified as
soon as possible, respond, assign a SAPR VA, and offer the victim healthcare and a SAFE.

        (2) Restricted Reporting allows sexual assault victims (see eligibility criteria in
Volume 1 of Reference (c)) to confidentially disclose the assault to specified individuals (i.e.,
SARC, SAPR VA, or healthcare personnel), in accordance with Reference (i), and receive
healthcare treatment, including emergency care, counseling, and assignment of a SARC and
SAPR VA, without triggering an official investigation. The victim’s report to healthcare
personnel (including the information acquired from a SAFE Kit), SARCs, or SAPR VAs will
NOT be reported to law enforcement or to the victim’s command, to initiate the official
investigative process, unless the victim consents or an established EXCEPTION applies in
accordance with Volume 1 of Reference (c), State laws, or federal regulations. When a sexual



Change 6, 03/26/2025                         4
                                                                 DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


assault is reported through Restricted Reporting, a SARC shall be notified as soon as possible,
respond, assign a SAPR VA, and offer the victim healthcare and a SAFE.

          (a) Eligibility for Restricted Reporting. The Restricted Reporting option applies to
Service members and their military dependents 18 years of age and older. For additional persons
who may be entitled to Restricted Reporting, see eligibility criteria in Volume 1 of Reference (c).

            (b) DoD Dual Objectives. The DoD is committed to ensuring victims of sexual
assault are protected; treated with dignity and respect; and provided support, advocacy, and care.
The DoD supports effective command awareness and prevention programs. The DoD also
strongly supports applicable law enforcement and criminal justice procedures that enable persons
to be held accountable for sexual assault offenses and criminal dispositions, as appropriate. To
achieve these dual objectives, DoD preference is for Unrestricted Reporting of sexual assaults to
allow for the provision of victims’ services and to pursue accountability. However, Unrestricted
Reporting may represent a barrier for victims to access services, when the victim desires no
command or law enforcement involvement. Consequently, the DoD recognizes a fundamental
need to provide a confidential disclosure vehicle via the Restricted Reporting option.

        (c) Designated Personnel Authorized to Accept a Restricted Report. Only the SARC,
SAPR VA, or healthcare personnel are designated as authorized to accept a Restricted Report.

            (d) SAFE Confidentiality Under Restricted Reporting. A SAFE and its information
shall be afforded the same confidentiality as is afforded victim statements under the Restricted
Reporting option. See Reference (c) for additional information.

            (e) Disclosure of Confidential Communications. In cases where a victim elects
Restricted Reporting, the SARC, assigned SAPR VA, and healthcare personnel may not disclose
confidential communications or SAFE Kit information to law enforcement or command
authorities, either within or outside the DoD, EXCEPT as provided in Volume 1 of Reference
(c). In certain situations when information about a sexual assault comes to the commander’s or
law enforcement official’s attention from a source independent of the Restricted Reporting
avenues and an independent investigation is initiated, a SARC, SAPR VA, or healthcare
personnel may NOT disclose confidential communications if obtained under Restricted
Reporting (see exceptions to Restricted Reporting in Volume 1 of Reference (c)). Improper
disclosure of confidential communications protected under Restricted Reporting, improper
release of healthcare information, and other violations of this policy or other laws and
regulations are prohibited and may result in discipline pursuant to the UCMJ, or other adverse
personnel or administrative actions.

    l. Victims must be informed of the availability of legal assistance and the right to consult
with a Special Victims’ Counsel (SVC)/Victims’ Legal Counsel (VLC) in accordance with
section 1716 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014 (Public Law
(P.L.) 113-66) (Reference (k)).




Change 6, 03/26/2025                         5
                                                               DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


    m. Enlistment or commissioning of personnel in the Military Services shall be prohibited
and no waivers are allowed when the person has a qualifying conviction (see Glossary) for a
crime of sexual assault.

    n. The focus of this Directive and Reference (c) is on the victim of sexual assault. The DoD
shall provide support to an active duty Service member regardless of when or where the sexual
assault took place.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. INFORMATION COLLECTIONS.

   a. The sexual assault reporting requirements in this Directive have been assigned Report
Control Symbol (RCS) DD-P&R(A) 2205 in accordance with Volume 1 of DoD Manual 8910.01
(Reference (l)).

    b. The Defense Sexual Assault Incident Database (DSAID) information collection referred
to in paragraphs 1f, 6l, 6n, and 6o of Enclosure 2 of this directive is submitted to Congress in
accordance with sections 561, 562, and 563 of P.L.110-417 (Reference (m)) and is coordinated
with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs in accordance with the procedures
in DoD Instruction 5545.02 (Reference (n)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 6. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
language to comply with Executive Order 14168 (Reference (o)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective January 23, 2012.




                                                Ashton B. Carter
                                                Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary



Change 6, 03/26/2025                        6
                                                                            DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


                                                  ENCLOSURE 1

                                                  REFERENCES


(a)     DoD Directive 6495.01, “Sexual Assault Prevention and Response (SAPR) Program,”
        October 6, 2005 (hereby cancelled)
(b)     Sections 101(d)(3) and 113, chapter 47, 1 and chapter 80 of Title 10, United States Code
(c)     DoD Instruction 6495.02, “Sexual Assault Prevention and Response,” dates vary by
        volume
(d)     DoD Instruction 3020.41, “Operational Contract Support (OCS),” December 20, 2011, as
        amended
(e)     DoD Instruction 6400.06, “Domestic Abuse Involving DoD Military and Certain Affiliated
        Personnel,” August 21, 2007, as amended
(f)     U.S. Department of Defense, “Manual for Courts-Martial,” 2012
(g)     DoD Directive 7050.06, “Military Whistleblower Protection,” April 17, 2015
(h)     DoD Instruction 6310.09, “Health Care Management for Patients Associated with a Sexual
        Assault,” May 7, 2019
(i)     DoD Directive 5400.11, “DoD Privacy Program,” October 29, 2014
(j)     DoD 6025.18-R, “DoD Health Information Privacy Regulation,” January 24, 2003
(k)     Public Law 113-66, “The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014,”
        December 2013
(l)     DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1 “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
        DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(m)     Public Law 110-417, “The Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
        Year 2009,” October 14, 2008
(n)     DoD Instruction 5545.02, “DoD Policy for Congressional Authorization and
        Appropriations Reporting Requirement,” December 19, 2008
(o)     Executive Order 14168, “Defending Women from Gender Ideology Extremism and
        Restoring Biological Truth to the Federal Government,” January 20, 2025
(p)     DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
        (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(q)     DoD Instruction 6400.09, “DoD Policy on Integrated Primary Prevention of Self-Directed
        Harm or Prohibited Abuse and Harm,” September 11, 2020
(r)     Section 577 of Public Law 108-375, “Ronald Reagan National Defense Authorization Act
        for Fiscal Year 2005,” October 28, 2004
(s)     Section 567(c) of Public Law 111-84, “The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
        Year 2010,” October 28, 2009
(t)     Title 32, United States Code
(u)     Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, "DoD Dictionary of Military and
        Associated Terms," current edition
(v)     Public Law 112-81, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012,””
        December 31, 2011



1
    Chapter 47 is also known and referred to in this Directive as “The Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ)”.


Change 6, 03/26/2025                                  7                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). In accordance with the authority in DoDD 5124.02 (Reference (p)), the
USD(P&R) shall:

   a. Develop overall policy and provide oversight for the DoD SAPR Program, except legal
processes in the UCMJ and criminal investigative matters assigned to the Judge Advocates
General of the Military Departments, the Staff Judge Advocate to the Commandant of the
Marine Corps, and IG DoD, respectively.

    b. Develop strategic program guidance, joint planning objectives, standard terminology, and
identify legislative changes needed to ensure the future availability of resources in support of
DoD SAPR policies.

    c. Develop metrics to measure compliance and effectiveness of SAPR training, awareness,
prevention, and response policies and programs. Analyze data and make recommendations
regarding the SAPR policies and programs to the Secretaries of the Military Departments.

   d. Monitor compliance with this Directive and Reference (c), and coordinate with the
Secretaries of the Military Departments regarding Service SAPR policies.

    e. Collaborate with Federal and State agencies that address SAPR issues and serve as liaison
to them as appropriate. Strengthen collaboration on sexual assault policy matters with U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs on the issues of providing high quality and accessible health care
and benefits to victims of sexual assault.

    f. Oversee the DoD Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office (SAPRO). Serving as
the DoD single point of authority, accountability, and oversight for the SAPR program, SAPRO
provides recommendations to the USD(P&R) on the issue of DoD sexual assault policy matters
on prevention, response, and oversight. The SAPRO Director will be appointed from among
general or flag officers of the Military Services or DoD employees in a comparable Senior
Executive Service position in accordance with P.L. 112-81 (Reference (v)). The SAPRO
Director is responsible for:

        (1) Implementing and monitoring compliance with DoD sexual assault policy on
prevention and response, except for legal processes in the UCMJ and Reference (f), and criminal
investigative matters assigned to the Judge Advocate General of the Military Departments, the
Staff Judge Advocate to the Commandant of the Marine Corps, and IG DoD, respectively.

       (2) Providing technical assistance to the Heads of the DoD Components in addressing
matters concerning SAPR.




Change 6, 03/26/2025                        8                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


        (3) Acquiring quarterly and annual SAPR data from the Military Services, assembling
annual congressional reports involving persons covered by this Directive and Reference (c), and
consulting with and relying on the Judge Advocate General of the Military Departments and the
Staff Judge Advocate to the Commandant of the Marine Corps in questions concerning
disposition results of sexual assault cases in their respective departments.

      (4) Establishing reporting categories and monitor specific goals included in the annual
SAPR assessments of each Military Service, in their respective departments.

        (5) Overseeing the creation, implementation, maintenance, and function of the DSAID,
an integrated database that will meet congressional reporting requirements, support Service
SAPR Program management, and inform DoD SAPRO oversight activities.

        (6) Overseeing development of strategic program guidance and joint planning objectives
for resources in support of the SAPR Program, and making recommendations on modifications
to policy, law, and regulations needed to ensure the continuing availability of such resources
(Reference (k)).


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)). The
ASD(HA), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), shall advise the
USD(P&R) on DoD sexual assault healthcare policies, clinical practice guidelines, related
procedures, and standards governing DoD healthcare programs for victims of sexual assault.
The ASD(HA) shall direct that all sexual assault patients be given priority, so that they shall be
treated as emergency cases.


3. DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE HUMAN RESOURCES ACTIVITY
(DoDHRA). The Director of DoDHRA, under the authority, direction, and control of
USD(P&R), shall provide operational support to the USD(P&R) as outlined in paragraph 1.f. of
this enclosure.


4. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (GC DoD). The GC DoD,
shall provide legal advice and assistance on all legal matters, including the review and
coordination of all proposed issuances and exceptions to policy and the review of all legislative
proposals, affecting mission and responsibilities of the DoD SAPRO.


5. IG DoD. The IG DoD shall:

    a. Develop and oversee the promulgation of criminal investigative and law enforcement
policy regarding sexual assault and establish guidelines for the collection and preservation of
evidence with non-identifiable personal information on the victim, for the Restricted Reporting
process, in coordination with the ASD(HA).




Change 6, 03/26/2025                         9                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


   b. Oversee criminal investigations of sexual assault conducted by the DoD Components.

   c. Collaborate with the DoD SAPRO in the development of investigative policy in support of
sexual assault prevention and response.


6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

   a. Establish departmental policies and procedures to implement the SAPR Program
consistent with the provisions of this Directive and Reference (c), to include the military
academies within their cognizance; monitor departmental compliance with this Directive and
Reference (c).

   b. Coordinate all Military Service SAPR policy changes with the USD(P&R).

    c. In coordination with the USD(P&R), implement recommendations regarding Military
Service compliance and effectiveness of SAPR training, awareness, prevention, and response
policies and programs.

   d. Align Service SAPR strategic plans with the DoD SAPR Strategic Plan.

   e. Align Service prevention strategies with the DoDI 6400.09 (Reference (q)).

    f. Require commanders to ensure that healthcare (including emergency care) and SAPR
services are provided to victims of sexual assaults in a timely manner unless declined by the
victim.

    g. Utilize the terms “Sexual Assault Response Coordinator (SARC)” and “SAPR Victim
Advocate (VA),” as defined in this Directive and Volume 1 of Reference (c), as standard terms
to facilitate communications and transparency regarding sexual assault response capacity.

    h. Establish the position of the SARC to serve as the SINGLE POINT OF CONTACT for
ensuring that sexual assault victims receive appropriate and responsive care. The SARC should
be a Service member, DoD civilian employee, or National Guard technician.

   i. Provide program-appropriate resources to enable the Combatant Commanders to achieve
compliance with the policies set forth in this Directive and Reference (c).

   j. Establish and codify Service SAPR Program support to Combatant Commands and
Defense Agencies, either as a host activity or in a deployed environment.

   k. Provide SAPR Program and obligation data to the USD(P&R), as required.

   l. Submit required data to DSAID. Require confirmation that a multi-disciplinary case
management group (CMG) tracks each open Unrestricted Report, is chaired by the installation



Change 6, 03/26/2025                        10                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


commander (or the deputy installation commander), and that CMG meetings are held monthly
for reviewing all Unrestricted Reports of sexual assaults in accordance with Reference (c).

   m. Provide annual reports of sexual assaults involving persons covered by this Directive and
Reference (c) to the DoD SAPRO for consolidation into the annual report to Congress in
accordance with section 577 of P.L. 108-375 (Reference (r)).

    n. Provide data connectivity, or other means, to authorized users to ensure all sexual assaults
reported in theater and other joint environments are incorporated into the DSAID, or authorized
interfacing systems for the documentation of reports of sexual assault, as required by section 563
of Reference (m).

    o. Ensure that Service data systems used to report case-level sexual assault information into
the DSAID are compliant with DoD data reporting requirements, pursuant to section 563 of
Reference (m).

    p. Require extensive, continuing in-depth SAPR training for DoD personnel and specialized
SAPR training for commanders, senior enlisted leaders, SARCs, SAPR VAs, investigators, law
enforcement officials, chaplains, healthcare personnel, and legal personnel in accordance with
the requirements in Reference (c).

    q. Require the installation SARC and the installation FAP staff to coordinate together when
a sexual assault occurs as a result of domestic abuse or domestic violence or involves child abuse
to ensure the victim is directed to FAP.

   r. Oversee sexual assault training within the DoD law enforcement community.

    s. Direct that Service military criminal investigative organizations require their investigative
units to communicate with their servicing SARC and participate with the multi-disciplinary
CMG, in accordance with this Directive and Reference (c).

   t. Provide commanders with procedures that:

       (1) Establish guidance for when a Military Protective Order (MPO) has been issued, that
the Service member who is protected by the order is informed, in a timely manner, of the
member’s option to request transfer from the command to which that member is assigned in
accordance with section 567(c) of Law P.L. 111-84 (Reference (s)).

        (2) Ensure that the appropriate civilian authorities shall be notified of the issuance of a
MPO and of the individuals involved in the order, when an MPO has been issued against a
Service member or when any individual addressed in the MPO does not reside on a military
installation at any time when an MPO is in effect. An MPO issued by a military commander
shall remain in effect until such time as the commander terminates the order or issues a
replacement order. (See section 561 of Reference (m).) The issuing commander also shall
notify the appropriate civilian authorities of any change made in a protective order covered by
chapter 80 of Reference (b), and the termination of the protective order.



Change 6, 03/26/2025                         11                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012



       (3) Ensure that the person seeking the MPO shall be advised that the MPO is not
enforceable by civilian authorities off base and that victims desiring protection off base are
advised to seek a civilian protective order. (See section 561 of Reference (m) and section 567 of
Reference (s)).


7. CHIEF, NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU (NGB). On behalf and with the approval of the
Secretaries of the Army and Air Force, and in coordination with DoD SAPRO and the State
Adjutants General, the Chief, NGB establishes and implements SAPR policy and procedures for
National Guard members on duty pursuant to Title 32, U.S.C. (Reference (t)).


8. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:

   a. Assess SAPR as part of the overall force planning function of any force deployment
decision, and periodically reassess the SAPR posture of deployed forces.

    b. Monitor implementation of this Directive, Reference (c), and implementing instructions,
including during military operations.

    c. Utilize the terms “Sexual Assault Response Coordinator (SARC)” and “SAPR Victim
Advocate (VA),” as defined in this Directive and Volume 1 of Reference (c), as standard terms
to facilitate communications and transparency regarding sexual assault response capacity.

   d. Review relevant documents, including the Combatant Commanders’ joint plans,
operational plans, concept plans, and deployment orders, to ensure they identify and include
SAPR Program requirements.


9. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, in coordination with the other Heads of the DoD Components and
through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:

    a. Establish policies and procedures to implement the SAPR Program and oversee
compliance with this Directive and Reference (c) within their areas of responsibility and during
military operations.

    b. Formally document agreements with installation host Service commanders, component
theater commanders, or other heads of another agency or organization, for investigative, legal,
healthcare, counseling, or other response support provided to incidents of sexual assault.

    c. Direct that relevant documents are drafted, including joint operational plans and
deployment orders, that establish theater-level requirements for the prevention of and response to
incidents of sexual assault that occur, to include during the time of military operations.



Change 6, 03/26/2025                        12                           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012



    d. Require that sexual assault response capability information be provided to all persons
within their area of responsibility covered by this Directive and Reference (c), to include
reporting options and SAPR services available at deployed locations and how to access these
options.

    e. Ensure that healthcare (including emergency care) and SAPR services are provided to
victims of sexual assaults in a timely manner unless declined by the victim.

    f. Direct subordinate commanders coordinate relationships and agreements for host or
installation support at forward-deployed locations to ensure a sexual assault response capability
is available to members of their command and persons covered by this Directive and Reference
(c) as consistent with operational requirements.

   g. Direct that sexual assault incidents are given priority so that they shall be treated as
emergency cases.

    h. Direct subordinate commanders provide all personnel with procedures to report sexual
assaults.

    i. Require subordinate commanders at all levels to monitor the command climate with
respect to SAPR, and take appropriate steps to address problems.

    j. Require that SAPR training for DoD personnel and specialized training for commanders,
senior enlisted leaders, SARCs, SAPR VAs, investigators, law enforcement officials, chaplains,
healthcare personnel, and legal personnel be conducted prior to deployment in accordance with
Reference (c).

   k. Direct subordinate commanders to develop procedures that:

        (1) Establish guidance for when an MPO has been issued, that the Service member who
is protected by the order is informed, in a timely manner, of the member’s option to request
transfer from the command to which that member is assigned in accordance with section 567(c)
of Reference (s).

        (2) In OCONUS areas, if appropriate, direct that the appropriate civilian authorities be
notified of the issuance of an MPO and of the individuals involved in an order when an MPO has
been issued against a Service member or when any individual involved in the MPO does not
reside on a military installation when an MPO is in effect. An MPO issued by a military
commander shall remain in effect until such time as the commander terminates the order or
issues a replacement order. (See section 561 of Reference (m).) The issuing commander also
shall notify the appropriate civilian authorities of any change made in a protective order covered
by chapter 80 of Reference (b) and the termination of the protective order.




Change 6, 03/26/2025                         13                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


         (3) Ensure that the person seeking the MPO is advised that the MPO is not enforceable
by civilian authorities off base, and victims desiring protection off base should be advised to seek
a civilian protective order in that jurisdiction pursuant to section 562 of Reference (m).

   l. Establish guidance for when an Expedited Transfer has been requested in accordance with
Reference (c).




Change 6, 03/26/2025                        14                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


                                        GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ASD(HA)     Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs


CMG         case management group


DoDD        Department of Defense Directive
DoDHRA      Department of Defense Human Resources Activity
DoDI        Department of Defense Instruction
DSAID       Defense Sexual Assault Incident Database


FAP         Family Advocacy Program


GC DoD      General Counsel of the Department of Defense


IG DoD      Inspector General of the Department of Defense


MPO         Military Protective Order


OCONUS      outside of the continental United States

P.L.        Public Law

SAFE        sexual assault forensic examination
SAPR        sexual assault prevention and response
SAPR VA     Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Victim Advocate
SAPRO       Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office
SARC        Sexual Assault Response Coordinator
SVC         Special Victims’ Counsel (Air Force, Army, National Guard, and Coast
            Guard)


UCMJ     Uniform Code of Military Justice
U.S.C.   United States Code
USD(P&R) Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness




Change 6, 03/26/2025                      15                            GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


VLC           Victims’ Legal Counsel (Navy and Marine Corps)


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

confidential communication. Oral, written, or electronic communications of personally
identifiable information concerning a sexual assault victim and the sexual assault incident
provided by the victim to the SARC, SAPR VA, or healthcare personnel in a Restricted Report.
This confidential communication includes the victim’s SAFE Kit and its information. See
http://www.archives.gov/cui.

consent. A freely given agreement to the conduct at issue by a competent person. An expression
of lack of consent through words or conduct means there is no consent. Lack of verbal or
physical resistance or submission resulting from the use of force, threat of force, or placing
another person in fear does not constitute consent. A current or previous dating or social or
sexual relationship by itself or the manner of dress of the person involved with the accused in the
conduct at issue shall not constitute consent. A sleeping, unconscious, or incompetent person
cannot consent.

crisis intervention. Emergency non-clinical care aimed at assisting victims in alleviating
potential negative consequences by providing safety assessments and connecting victims to
needed resources. Either the SARC or SAPR VA will intervene as quickly as possible to assess
the victim’s safety and determine the needs of victims and connect them to appropriate referrals,
as needed.

DSAID. A DoD database that captures uniform data provided by the Military Services and
maintains all sexual assault data collected by the Military Services. This database shall be a
centralized, case-level database for the uniform collection of data regarding incidence of sexual
assaults involving persons covered by this Directive and Reference (c). DSAID will include
information when available, or when not limited by Restricted Reporting, or otherwise prohibited
by law, about the nature of the assault, the victim, the offender, and the disposition of reports
associated with the assault. DSAID shall be available to the SAPRO and the DoD to develop
and implement congressional reporting requirements. Unless authorized by law, or needed for
internal DoD review or analysis, disclosure of data stored in DSAID will only be granted when
disclosure is ordered by a military, Federal, or State judge or other officials or entities as required
by a law or applicable U.S. international agreement. This term and its definition are proposed
for inclusion in the next edition of the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms
(Reference (u)).

emergency. A situation that requires immediate intervention to prevent the loss of life, limb,
sight, or body tissue to prevent undue suffering. Regardless of appearance, a sexual assault
victim needs immediate medical intervention to prevent loss of life or undue suffering resulting
from physical injuries internal or external, sexually transmitted infections, pregnancy, or




Change 6, 03/26/2025                          16                                 GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


psychological distress. Sexual assault victims shall be given priority as emergency cases
regardless of evidence of physical injury.

emergency care. Emergency medical care includes physical and emergency psychological
medical services and a SAFE consistent with Reference (h).

FAP. A DoD program designated to address child abuse and domestic abuse in military families
in cooperation with civilian social service agencies and military and civilian law enforcement
agencies. Prevention, advocacy, and intervention services are provided to individuals who are
eligible for treatment in military medical treatment facilities.

healthcare. Medical (physical) and mental healthcare.

healthcare personnel. Defined in Reference (c).

healthcare provider. Defined in Reference (c).

Military Services. The term, as used in the SAPR Program, includes Army, Air Force, Navy,
Marines, Reserve Components, and their respective Military Academies.

non-identifiable personal information. Non-identifiable personal information includes those
facts and circumstances surrounding the sexual assault incident or that information about the
individual that enables the identity of the individual to remain anonymous. In contrast, personal
identifying information is information belonging to the victim and alleged assailant of a sexual
assault that would disclose or have a tendency to disclose the person’s identity.

official investigative process. The formal process a law enforcement organization uses to gather
evidence and examine the circumstances surrounding a report of sexual assault.

personal identifiable information. Includes the person’s name, other particularly identifying
descriptions (e.g., physical characteristics or identity by position, rank, or organization), or other
information about the person or the facts and circumstances involved that could reasonably be
understood to identify the person (e.g., a female in a particular squadron or barracks when there
is only one female assigned).

qualifying conviction. A State or Federal conviction, or a finding of guilty in a juvenile
adjudication, for a felony crime of sexual assault and any general or special court-martial
conviction for a UCMJ offense, which otherwise meets the elements of a crime of sexual assault,
even though not classified as a felony or misdemeanor within the UCMJ. In addition, any
offense that requires registration as a sex offender is a qualifying conviction.

recovery-oriented care. Focus on the victim and on doing what is necessary and appropriate to
support victim recovery, and also, if a Service member, to support that Service member to be
fully mission capable and engaged.




Change 6, 03/26/2025                          17                                 GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012


Restricted Reporting. Reporting option that allows sexual assault victims to confidentially
disclose the assault to specified individuals (i.e., SARC, SAPR VA, or healthcare personnel), in
accordance with Reference (h), and receive medical treatment, including emergency care,
counseling, and assignment of a SARC and SAPR VA, without triggering an official
investigation. The victim’s report provided to healthcare personnel (including the information
acquired from a SAFE Kit), SARCs, or SAPR VAs will NOT be reported to law enforcement or
to the command to initiate the official investigative process unless the victim consents or an
established EXCEPTION applies in accordance with Volume 1 of Reference (c). The Restricted
Reporting option applies to Service members and their military dependents 18 years of age and
older. For additional persons who may be entitled to Restricted Reporting, see eligibility criteria
in Volume 1 of Reference (c). Only a SARC, SAPR VA, or healthcare personnel may receive a
Restricted Report, previously referred to as Confidential Reporting. This term and its definition
are proposed for inclusion in the next edition of Reference (u).

SAFE Kit. The medical and forensic examination of a sexual assault victim under circumstances
and controlled procedures to ensure the physical examination process and the collection,
handling, analysis, testing, and safekeeping of any bodily specimens and evidence meet the
requirements necessary for use as evidence in criminal proceedings. The victim’s SAFE Kit is
treated as a confidential communication when conducted as part of a Restricted Report. This
term and its definition are proposed for inclusion in the next edition of Reference (u).

SAPRO. Serves as the DoD’s single point of authority, accountability, and oversight for the
SAPR program, except for legal processes and criminal investigative matters that are the
responsibility of the Judge Advocates General of the Military Departments and the IG,
respectively. This term and its definition are proposed for inclusion in the next edition of
Reference (u).

SAPR Program. A DoD program for the Military Departments and the DoD Components that
establishes SAPR policies to be implemented worldwide. The program objective is an
environment and military community intolerant of sexual assault. This term and its definition
are proposed for inclusion in the next edition of Reference (u).

SAPR VA. A person who, as a victim advocate, shall provide non-clinical crisis intervention,
referral, and ongoing non-clinical support to adult sexual assault victims. Support will include
providing information on available options and resources to victims. The SAPR VA, on behalf
of the sexual assault victim, provides liaison assistance with other organizations and agencies on
victim care matters and reports directly to the SARC when performing victim advocacy duties.
Personnel who are interested in serving as a SAPR VA are encouraged to volunteer for this duty
assignment. This term and its definition are proposed for inclusion in the next edition of
Reference (u).

SARC. The single point of contact at an installation or within a geographic area who oversees
sexual assault awareness, prevention, and response training; coordinates medical treatment,
including emergency care, for victims of sexual assault; and tracks the services provided to a
victim of sexual assault from the initial report through final disposition and resolution. This term
and its definition are proposed for inclusion in the next edition of Reference (u).



Change 6, 03/26/2025                        18                                GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 6495.01, January 23, 2012



senior commander. An officer, usually in the grade of O-6 or higher, who is the commander of a
military installation or comparable unit and has been designated by the Military Service
concerned to oversee the SAPR Program.

Service member. An active duty member of a Military Service. In addition, National Guard and
Reserve Component members who are sexually assaulted when performing active service, as
defined in section 101(d)(3) of Reference (b), and inactive duty training.

sexual assault. Intentional sexual contact characterized by use of force, threats, intimidation, or
abuse of authority or when the victim does not or cannot consent. The term includes a broad
category of sexual offenses consisting of the following specific UCMJ offenses: rape, sexual
assault, aggravated sexual contact, abusive sexual contact, forcible sodomy (forced oral or anal
sex), or attempts to commit these acts.

SVC. Attorneys who are assigned to provide legal assistance in accordance with section 1716 of
Reference (k) and Service regulations. The Air Force, Army, National Guard, and Coast Guard
refer to these attorneys as SVC. The Navy and Marine Corps refer to these attorneys as VLC.

Unrestricted Reporting. A process that an individual covered by this policy uses to disclose,
without requesting confidentiality or Restricted Reporting, that he or she is the victim of a sexual
assault. Under these circumstances, the victim’s report provided to healthcare personnel, the
SARC, a SAPR VA, command authorities, or other persons is reported to law enforcement and
may be used to initiate the official investigative process. Additional policy and guidance are
provided in Reference (c). This term and its definition are proposed for inclusion in the next
edition of Reference (u).

victim. A person who asserts direct physical, emotional, or pecuniary harm as a result of the
commission of a sexual assault. The term encompasses all persons 18 and over eligible to
receive treatment in military medical treatment facilities; however, the Restricted Reporting
option applies to Service members and their military dependents 18 years of age and older. For
additional persons who may be entitled to Restricted Reporting, see eligibility criteria in Volume
1 of Reference (c).

VLC. Attorneys who are assigned to provide legal assistance in accordance with section 1716 of
Reference (k) and Service regulations. The Air Force, Army, National Guard, and Coast Guard
refer to these attorneys as SVC. The Navy and Marine Corps refer to these attorneys as VLC.




Change 6, 03/26/2025                         19                                GLOSSARY
