                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 3222.04
                                                                               March 26, 2014
                                                       Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018

                                                                                     USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:     Electronic Warfare (EW) Policy

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 3222.4 (Reference (a)) to update
EW policy, definitions, and responsibilities within the DoD for providing operational forces with
EW capabilities to demonstrate electromagnetic superiority across the range of military
operations. These capabilities include electronic warfare support (ES), electronic protection
(EP), and electronic attack (EA) weapon systems.


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to the OSD, the Military Departments, the Office
of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant
Commands (CCMDs), the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the
Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the DoD
(referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

    a. Maintain electromagnetic spectrum (EMS) superiority through improving organization,
training, and equipping of the EW Enterprise.

  b. Provide governance of the DoD EW Enterprise through the Electronic Warfare Executive
Committee (EW EXCOM), to maintain EMS superiority.

   c. Maintain a DoD EW strategy and capabilities roadmap, through the EW EXCOM.

    d. Facilitate synchronization and integration of EW by sharing tactics, techniques,
procedures, intelligence, and technologies among the DoD Components. Employ EW as a cross-
cutting capability of the joint capability area framework.

   e. Develop EW requirements that effectively support joint electromagnetic spectrum
operations (JEMSO) in accordance with the CJCS Instruction 3170.011 series (Reference (b)).
                                                                 DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014



  f. Develop and acquire EW systems that effectively support (JEMSO, in accordance with
DoDD 5000.01 (Reference (c)).

   g. Integrate EW into operations and planning efforts across the range of military operations,
specifically in conventional operations and in Irregular Warfare, Information Operations, Space
Operations, Cyberspace Operations, and Navigation Warfare (NAVWAR).

    h. Incorporate EW capabilities, tactics, techniques, and procedures into joint exercises and
training regimes to the maximum extent possible. Emphasize and prioritize training in a
congested and contested electromagnetic operational environment against representative threats
at all large force training exercises, both on live training ranges and in virtual training
environments, across all domains.

   i. Provide operationally representative and relevant training ranges to support EW readiness
and capability development. Enable spectrum planning to support EMS access.

    j. Validate EMS-dependent system’s capability to operate in the operational environment
throughout the system’s life cycle, and require the documentation of EP in a Spectrum
Supportability Risk Assessment (SSRA) considered at all Milestone Reviews, in accordance with
DoD Instruction (DoDI) 4650.01 (Reference (d)).

   k. Encourage cooperative EW system developments and the application of JEMSO strategies
among the United States and its allies and partners.

   l. Encourage development of common and interoperability EW capabilities among Military
Departments, interagency partners, and allies and partner countries. Where appropriate, integrate
EW capabilities in operational requirement documents, mission needs statements, and
subsequent development, design, and test of systems.

    m. Evaluate electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) and the potential for mutual
electromagnetic interference (EMI) between U.S. and allied spectrum-dependent (SD) systems,
subsystems, and equipment. Ensure proper operation in intended electromagnetic environments
(EMEs) without suffering unacceptable performance degradation from electromagnetic
environmental effects (E3) or causing unintentional performance degradation to other systems in
accordance with Reference (d) and DoDD 3222.03 (Reference (e)).

    n. Provide effective intelligence support over the life cycle of EW systems and their related
databases. To the maximum extent possible, ensure related databases are releasable to U.S. allies
and applicable foreign mission partners.

    o. Assess EW threats and track anticipated or potential adversarial forces’ trends with
respect to the evolving major technologies and strategies.

   p. Protect EW capabilities in accordance with DoDI S-5230.28 (Reference (f)). Ensure new
security classification guides conform with horizontal security protection.


                                                2
Change 2, 08/31/2018                                                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014



4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this directive to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (g)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective March 26, 2014.




                                               Christine H. Fox
                                               Acting Deputy Secretary of Defense




                                               Change 1 approved by
                                               Robert O. Work
                                               Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




                                               3
Change 2, 08/31/2018                                                           ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


                                        ENCLOSURE 1

                                         REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 3222.4, “Electronic Warfare (EW) and Command and Control Warfare
      (C2W) Countermeasures,” July 31, 1992 (hereby cancelled)
(b)   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3170.011, “Joint Capabilities Integration
      and Development System (JCIDS),” January 23, 2005
(c)   DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003, as amended
(d)   DoD Instruction 4650.01, “Policy and Procedures for Management and Use of the
      Electromagnetic Spectrum,” January 9, 2009
(e)   DoD Directive 3222.03, “DoD Electromagnetic Environmental Effects (E3) Program,”
      August 25, 2014, as amended
(f)   DoD Instruction S-5230.28, “Low Observable (LO) and Counter Low Observable (CLO)
      Programs (U),” May 26, 2005
(g)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
      Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
      of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(h)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of an Electronic Warfare
      Executive Committee,” March 17, 2015
(i)   Department of Defense Electronic Warfare Executive Committee Charter, August 11, 2015
(j)   DoD Instruction 5200.01, “DoD Information Security Program and Protection of Sensitive
      Compartmented Information (SCI),” April 21, 2016
(k)   DoD Instruction O-3600.02, “Information Operations (IO) Security Classification Guidance
      (U),” November 28, 2005
(l)   DoD Directive 3600.01, “Information Operations (IO),” May 2, 2013
(m)   DoD Directive 5111.21, “Arms Transfer and Technology Release Senior Steering Group
      and Technology Security and Foreign Disclosure Office,” October 14, 2014
(n)   DoD Directive 1322.18, “Military Training,” January, 13, 2009
(o)   DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,”
      January 7, 2015, as amended
(p)   DoD Instruction 5250.01, “Management of Intelligence Mission Data (IMD) in DoD
      Acquisition,” January 22, 2013
(q)   Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981, as
      amended
(r)   DoD Directive 5100.20, “National Security Agency/Central Security Service (NSA/CSS),”
      January 26, 2010
(s)   DoD Instruction O-3115.07, “Signals Intelligence (SIGINT) (U),” September 15, 2008, as
      amended
(t)   DoD Instruction 8320.02, “Sharing Data, Information, and Information Technology (IT)
      Services in the Department of Defense,” August 5, 2013
(u)   DoD Instruction 8320.05, “Electromagnetic Spectrum Data Sharing,” August 18, 2011
(v)   DoD Directive 4650.05, “Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (PNT),” June 9, 2016
(w)   National Security Presidential Directive-39, “U.S. Space-Based Position, Navigation, and
      Timing Policy,” December 8, 2004

                                                4
Change 2, 08/31/2018                                                            ENCLOSURE 1
                                                           DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


(x) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Navigation Warfare Implementation
    Guidance,” November 17, 2004
(y) Title 10, United States Code
(z) DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major
    Components,” December 21, 2010




                                           5
Change 2, 08/31/2018                                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGSTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L):

    a. Serves as the co-chair of the EW EXCOM and the principal staff assistant to the Secretary
of Defense on issues relating to EW acquisition and development. The EW EXCOM was
directed by the March 17, 2015 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (h)),
which executes the EW EXCOM charter (Reference (i)).

   b. Oversees the adequacy and sufficiency of all materiel, logistics, and facilities aspects of
EW, in coordination with other appropriate OSD offices, the Office of the CJCS (OCJCS), the
Military Departments, and the CCMDs.

    c. Oversees the acquisition of EW major defense acquisition programs (MDAPs) and EW
capabilities of other MDAPs. Publishes plans and procedures to guide interoperability of EW
systems with other SD systems to include smaller EW programs and rapid acquisition
capabilities, in coordination with the DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO).

   d. Serves as the focal point for EW research, development, acquisition, and investment
within the DoD. Co-Chairs the EW EXCOM to:

      (1) Oversee the development and implementation of the EW strategy and capabilities
roadmap for orderly technology development and prioritized system acquisition. The EW
EXCOM will leverage the EW Science and Technology Community of Interest.

       (2) Coordinate DoD service investments in accordance with the EW Roadmap to
accelerate the development and delivery of EW capabilities.

   e. Reviews EW programs for duplication and maximum multi-Service applications. When
common requirements exist and acquisition efficiencies can be realized, ensure the Military
Departments consider joint EW designs and acquisitions.

    f. Oversees the measuring and recording of EM signatures and operating parameters for EW
systems in the appropriate databases, in coordination with the DoD CIO. Oversees availability
and adequacy of joint test and joint training infrastructure for developmental and operational test
and evaluation of EW system capabilities. The test and joint training infrastructure includes
hardware and software simulations, hybrids, anechoic chambers, emulators and open air ranges.

   g. Requires the measuring and recording of EM signatures and operating parameters for all
U.S. weapons systems in the appropriate databases to enable mission data programming.




Change 2, 08/31/2018            ENCLOSURE 26
                                                                DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


   h. Oversees the evaluation of EW systems for vulnerability to potential hostile EW activity,
exploitation by foreign intelligence EMS sources and methods, and inadvertent friendly EMI.

    i. Develops and updates DoD EW classification guidelines that conform to requirements set
in DoDI 5200.01 (Reference (j)) and DoDI O-3600.02 (Reference (k)), in coordination with the
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) and the Secretaries of the Military
Departments.

   j. Coordinates, oversees, and assesses the efforts of the DoD Components to plan, program,
and develop capabilities in support of EW requirements.

    k. Publishes an annual EW investment strategy that identifies resources and investments
necessary to close known capability gaps and milestones to track progress, in coordination with
the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), CJCS, and the Commander, United States
Strategic Command (CDRUSSTRATCOM).

   l. Reviews and approves quick reaction capability programs.

  m. Directs consideration of EW throughout a system’s or subsystem’s life cycle. Ensures
EW is addressed during Milestone Reviews for all acquisition programs.

   n. Requires the testing of systems in operationally-representative EMS environments during
development test and evaluation.

   o. Directs science and technology development programs in support of EW strategies using
emerging technologies and advanced warfighting concepts to maintain U.S. technological
superiority. Through the EW EXCOM, in coordination with the Department’s Science and
Technology Executive Committee and other stakeholders, oversees development of the EW
roadmap for implementation of EW capabilities.

   p. Coordinates support for life cycle intelligence mission data plans (LMDP) through the
conceptualization, development, testing, and employment of EW systems, in coordination with
USD(I).

    q. Coordinates the provision of databases and specifications of U.S. systems with the
Intelligence Community (IC) when EW equipment is transferred subject to foreign military sales
or exported via direct commercial sales.

  r. Supports international cooperation efforts in the research, development, and acquisition of
EW capabilities, and resolves issues associated with these efforts.


2. USD(P)). The USD(P):

   a. Incorporates and maintains EW in national security and defense policy as appropriate.




Change 2, 08/31/2018           ENCLOSURE 27
                                                                  DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


   b. Oversees the integration of EW into plans to achieve national security objectives, and
advises on the forces necessary to implement that strategy.

    c. Provides DoD with overall EW policy development, implementation, and oversight in
mission areas under the cognizance of the USD(P), including international activities, homeland
defense, stability operations, space, cyberspace, and special operations and low-intensity conflict
missions.

  d. Leads interagency and international coordination involving planning and development of
EW capabilities, and conducts these activities in accordance with other applicable policies.

   e. Develops policy to integrate intelligence support to EW in support of CCMD
requirements, in coordination with the USD(I).

    f. Provides policy guidance and oversight on roles and responsibilities for the integration of
EW with cyberspace operations in coordination with the Senior Cyber Advisor and other
information-related capabilities in accordance with DoDD 3600.01 (Reference (l)).

   g. Issues EW information assurance certification waivers in accordance with DoDD 5111.21
(Reference (m)).


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R):

   a. Provides oversight of EW training, personnel assignments and advancements, and
organization as it relates to readiness in coordination with other appropriate OSD offices, the
OCJCS, the Military Departments, and the CCMDs to establish and maintain EW and EMS
Control training and education in support of the EW career force.

   b. Provides policy and oversight for EW training in accordance with DoDD 1322.18
(Reference (n)).

    c. In collaboration with the USD(AT&L), oversees the availability and adequacy of joint
training infrastructure for use by the training community.


4. USD(I). The USD(I):

   a. Serves as the DoD lead within the IC regarding intelligence support to EW.

    b. Provides oversight of the development of intelligence and collections capabilities in
support of EW acquisitions, planning, and execution, including databases and analytic and
intelligence support to EW capabilities, in coordination with other appropriate OSD offices, the
OCJCS, the Military Departments, and the CCMDs.




Change 2, 08/31/2018            ENCLOSURE 28
                                                                 DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


    c. Oversees standardization of EW data and databases to achieve maximum interoperability,
discoverability, and compatibility in fulfilling common worldwide requirements in coordination
with the IC, Military Departments, and OSD.

    d. Assesses the performance and responsiveness of defense and military intelligence
activities to support EW planning and execution.

    e. Oversees the collection and production of intelligence on and exploitation of EW targets
of interest to support the development of required EW capabilities.

    f. Provides intelligence on and exploits EA targets of interest to support the development of
required EA capabilities. Assists in the integration of national systems data into DoD platforms,
systems, and architectures.

    g. Oversees IC efforts supporting integration of national systems data into DoD platforms,
systems, and architectures.

    h. Oversees the management of the EW Integrated Reprogramming database for including
primary, validated, and reprogramming data derived from analysis of observed EMS
phenomena..


5. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). Under the authority, direction,
and control of the USD(I), the Director, DIA:

   a. Validates DoD Components’ EW Validated Online Lifecycle Threat (VOLT) reports for
ACAT ID programs and validates threat databases and threat assessment procedures used by the
DoD Components in preparing system threat assessments for Acquisition Category 1D (ACAT
1D) acquisition programs in accordance with DoDI 5000.02 (Reference (o)).
   b. Provides effective intelligence support to the Intelligence Mission Data Center that
approves the LMDP of EW systems and their related databases, in accordance with DoDI
5250.01 (Reference (p)).


6. DIRECTOR, NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY/CHIEF, CENTRAL SECURITY
SERVICE (DIRNSA/CHCSS). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I), and in
accordance with Executive Order 12333 (Reference (q)) and DoDD 5100.20 (Reference (r)), the
DIRNSA/CHCSS:

   a. Provides signals intelligence in support of EW capabilities development, planning,
analysis, and operations.

   b. May provide advisory tasking to U.S. commands in accordance with DoDI O-3115.07
(Reference (s)) and, in conjunction with DIA, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Military
Departments, provides analytical support of EW activities.




Change 2, 08/31/2018           ENCLOSURE 29
                                                                  DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


7. DoD CIO. The DoD CIO:

    a. Provides policy, oversight, guidance, and coordination, including coordination with other
federal and industry agencies, for all DoD matters related to EMS and serves as the national and
international DoD lead for management and use of the EMS and for E3 programs pursuant to
References (d) and (e), to support the USD(AT&L) and USD(P) with the responsibilities
assigned in sections 1 and 2 of this enclosure.

   b. In coordination with USD(P&R) is the lead for policies related to the spectrum
management workforce.

    c. Coordinates with the USD(AT&L) to provide oversight and guidance with respect to
programs designated as major defense acquisition programs and major automated information
systems (MAIS) as they relate to EM battle management, databases, and architectures. Supports
data standardization of databases across EW, intelligence, and communications communities of
interest.

   d. Provides oversight and guidance for DoD data sharing related to the EMS and EMS
dependent systems, including the identification of all data required to conduct JEMSO and
control the EMS, pursuant to DoDI 8320.02 (Reference (t)) and DoDI 8320.05 (Reference (u)).
Oversees the establishment and maintenance of the Joint Authoritative Data Source, Joint
Spectrum Data Repository, and DoD Data Community of Interest.

    e. Provides policy, oversight, and guidance for the protection of DoD Position, Navigation,
and Timing services and the identification of the required capabilities to detect, locate, and
mitigate any interference on a global basis that adversely affects use of GPS for military
operations. Pursuant to DoDD 4650.05 (Reference (v)), National Security President Directive-
39 (Reference (w)), and Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (x)), supports
the DoD Components with the assigned responsibilities identified in this enclosure.


8. DIRECTOR, DISA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the DoD CIO, the
Director, DISA:

    a. Provides assistance and guidance on the business processes for the consolidation of
spectrum-related data that foster the life cycle interoperability and supportability of EW systems,
subsystems, and equipment, pursuant to Reference (u), to support the DoD Components with the
assigned data responsibilities identified in this enclosure.

   b. Provides assistance and guidance to perform required EMC analyses and studies to
support:

       (1) Effective use of EW systems in EMEs in accordance with References (c) and (d).

      (2) The DoD Components to enable effective use of the EMS, to include spectrum
management and interference resolution support to CCMDs.



Change 2, 08/31/2018           ENCLOSURE 210
                                                                  DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014




9. DIRECTOR, COST ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAM EVALUATION (DCAPE). In
coordination with other appropriate OSD offices, the OCJCS, the Military Departments, and the
CCMDs, the DCAPE:

   a. Analyzes and evaluates plans, programs, and budgets with respect to EMS dependencies
within DoD programs.

    b. Provides leadership in developing and promoting improved analytical tools and methods
for analyzing the impacts of the EM environment on EMS-dependent systems.


10. DIRECTOR, OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION (DOT&E). In coordination
with the Military Departments, U.S. Special Operations Command (USSOCOM), and the IC, the
DOT&E:

   a. Oversees the evaluation of EW systems for operational effectiveness and suitability.

    b. Assesses the vulnerability of U.S. weapons systems to potential hostile EW activity,
inadvertent friendly EMI, and exploitation by foreign intelligence sources and methods.


11. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. Within their respective
responsibilities under Title 10, U.S. Code (Reference (y)), the Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

   a. Organize, train, and equip service personnel to satisfy DoD EW requirements.

    b. Establish Military Department EW leadership with responsibilities to plan, program,
direct, and manage Service EW policies, capabilities, and organizations to achieve control of the
EMOE.

   c. Develop Military Department EW doctrine and tactics.

   d. Develop, and update as needed, Service EW Roadmaps that support the DoD EW strategy
developed and coordinated by the EW EXCOM.

    e. Direct that all EMS-dependent capabilities are evaluated for vulnerability to potential
hostile EMS activity, exploitation by foreign intelligence sources and methods, and inadvertent
friendly EMI. Identify EW deficiencies in military systems and weapon platforms that degrade
normal operation, and further identify costs associated with employing backup systems or
methods.




Change 2, 08/31/2018           ENCLOSURE 211
                                                                 DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


   f. Conduct research, development, test, and evaluation to develop EW capabilities aligned
with the DoD EW Strategy. Direct that test and evaluation of EW capabilities are conducted in
operationally relevant environments.

    g. Direct that EW programs and databases achieve maximum standardization,
interoperability, and compatibility in fulfilling common worldwide requirements, in coordination
with the USD(AT&L), the Joint Staff, the USD(I), and the DoD CIO. Pursue joint program
offices when common EW capabilities are identified.

    h. Develop and conduct education, training, and exercises to provide for the successful
planning, integration, and execution of EW in operationally-representative environments.

    i. Support the United States Strategic Command’s (USSTRATCOM’s) periodic assessments
of EW capabilities.

   j. Ensure that EW training capability will be mission driven and be of sufficient quantity and
complexity to address present and anticipated needs.

12. CJCS. The CJCS:

   a. Serves as the principal military EW advisor to the President, the National Security
Council, and the Secretary of Defense.

   b. Ensures the National Military Strategy incorporates EW capabilities and updates the
National Military Strategic Plan for EW.

    c. Supports the USD(AT&L) in the development and update of the DoD EW investment
strategy and the USD(P) in the development and update of the DoD EW strategy.

   d. Oversees the integration and execution of EW-related activities assigned in DoDD
5100.01 (Reference (z)).

   e. Validates capability-based EW requirements through the Joint Requirements Oversight
Council.

    f. Reviews regional military plans (operation plan and contingency plan), and monitors
military operations in the geographic Combatant Commanders’ areas of responsibility.
Incorporates EW during the preparation of strategic plans and adequately apportions EW forces
to CCMDs based on the Secretary’s guidance for employment of the force. As required,
constitutes and supervises response cells, crisis operating elements, and time-sensitive planning
in support of JEMSO.

    g. Delineates the rules of engagement and the authorities for employment of EW capabilities
to DoD personnel.




Change 2, 08/31/2018           ENCLOSURE 212
                                                                  DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


   h. Requires that tactics and employment are coordinated among the DoD Components and
with allied nations as necessary.

  i. Establishes and maintains a uniform system for evaluating the EW preparedness of each
CCMD to carry out assigned missions.

   j. Develops and maintains joint policies and doctrine for core, supportive, and related EW
capabilities in joint operations.

   k. Ensures all joint education, training, plans, and operations include, and are consistent
with, EW policy, strategy, and doctrine.

   l. Coordinates joint training and manning requirements for EW in coordination with the
Military Departments.

    m. Designates joint, Military Department, and multinational EW database and
reprogramming responsibilities, and provides oversight of the joint, Service, and multinational
EW database and reprogramming effort.

  n. Oversees continuity of U.S. efforts in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s Military
Committee to improve allied EW capability.

    o. Evaluates the capability of the unified and specified commands to operate in an
operationally-representative EM environment, and recommends appropriate corrective action to
the respective commanders and the Secretary of Defense.


13. VICE CJCS. The Vice CJCS serves as the co-chair of the EW EXCOM and, with the
USD(AT&L), presents issues relating to EW acquisition and development to the Secretary of
Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Deputy’s Management Action Group.


14. COMBATANT COMMANDERS. Through the CJCS, the Combatant Commanders:

   a. Integrate, plan, and execute EW when conducting campaigns across the range of military
operations, and identify and prioritize EW operational requirements.

   b. Support USSTRATCOM’s periodic assessments of all EW capabilities.


15. CDRUSSTRATCOM. In addition to the duties in paragraph 14a of this enclosure, the
CDRUSSTRATCOM advocates for joint EW capabilities to include:

    a. Identifying and prioritizing required joint EW capabilities across doctrine, organization,
training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, facilities and policy in support of CCMD
missions and in accordance with DoD guidance for programming and planning.



Change 2, 08/31/2018           ENCLOSURE 213
                                                               DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014



   b. Ensuring CCMD equities are integrated into strategic DoD goals and objectives for EW.

   c. Providing contingency support of EW to other CCMDs.

   d. Supporting CCMD joint training and planning related to controlling the EMS.

   e. Assisting CCMDs and Military Departments’ components to plan, execute, and assess
JEMSO across all domains.

   f. Collaborating with CCMDs and Military Departments’ components in the development
and evaluation of JEMSO-related tactics, techniques, and procedures in support of warfighter
requirements.

    g. Coordinating with CCMDs and Military Departments’ components to incorporate JEMSO
into joint training and exercises.

   h. Providing oversight of joint EW training.

   i. Sponsoring periodic joint exercises to develop, demonstrate, and assess EW capabilities
and JEMSO tactics, techniques, and procedures.

   j. Developing periodic assessments of DoD EW capabilities in coordination with CCMDs.


16. COMMANDER, USSOCOM (CDRUSSOCOM). In addition to the duties in section 14 of
this enclosure, the CDRUSSOCOM determines and articulates EW capabilities required in
special operations and supports the other Combatant Commanders through the joint employment
of special operations-specific EW capabilities.




Change 2, 08/31/2018          ENCLOSURE 214
                                                              DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


                                        GLOSSARY


                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 ACAT 1D                Acquisition Category 1 (Defense Acquisition Executive is Decision
                        Authority)


 CCMD                   Combatant Commands
 CDRUSSOCOM             Commander, United States Special Operations Command
 CDRUSSTRATCOM          Commander, United States Strategic Command
 CJCS                   Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


 DCAPE                  Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
 DIA                    Defense Intelligence Agency
 DIRNSA/CHCSS           Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
 DoD CIO                DoD Chief Information Officer
 DoDD                   DoD Directive
 DoDI                   DoD Instruction
 DOT&E                  Director, Operational Test and Evaluation


 E3                     electromagnetic environmental effects
 EA                     electronic attack
 EMC                    electromagnetic compatibility
 EME                    electromagnetic environment
 EMI                    electromagnetic interference
 EMOE                   electromagnetic operational environment
 EMS                    electromagnetic spectrum
 EP                     electronic protection
 ES                     electronic warfare support
 EW                     electronic warfare
 EW EXCOM               Electronic Warfare Executive Committee


 FY                     fiscal year


 IC                     Intelligence Community



Change 2, 08/31/2018             GLOSSARY15
                                                                       DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


 JEMSO                    joint electromagnetic spectrum operations


 LMDP                     life cycle intelligence mission data plans


 MAIS                     major automated information system
 MDAP                     major defense acquisition program


 NAVWAR                   navigation warfare


 OCJCS                    Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


 SD                       spectrum dependent


 USD(AT&L)                Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
                          Logistics
 USD(I)                   Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
 USD(P)                   Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
 USD(P&R)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
 USSOCOM                  United States Special Operations Command
 USSTRATCOM               United States Strategic Command


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

EA. Division of EW involving the use of EM energy, directed energy, or anti-radiation weapons
to attack personnel, facilities, or equipment with the intent of degrading, neutralizing, or
destroying enemy combat capability.

electronic warfare support (ES). Division of EW involving actions tasked by, or under direct
control of, an operational commander to search for, intercept, identify, and locate or localize
sources of intentional and unintentional radiated EM energy for the purpose of immediate threat
recognition, targeting, planning and conduct of future operations.

EMOE. The background EM environment and the friendly, neutral, and adversarial EM order of
battle within the EM area of influence associated with a given operational area.




Change 2, 08/31/2018               GLOSSARY16
                                                                   DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


EP. Division of EW involving actions taken to protect personnel, facilities, and equipment from
any effects of friendly or enemy use of the EMS that degrade, neutralize, or destroy friendly
combat capability.

EW. Military action involving the use of EM and directed energy to control the EMS or to
attack the enemy. EW consists of three divisions: EA, EP, and ES.

horizontal security protection. Activities that ensure consistent security classification and
protection are in place for similar critical program information throughout the DoD.

IC. A federation of Executive Branch agencies and organizations that work separately and
together to conduct intelligence activities necessary for the conduct of foreign relations and the
protection of the national security of the United States.

JEMSO. Activities consisting of EW and joint EM spectrum management operations used to
exploit, attack, protect, and manage the EMOE.

MAIS. A DoD program for the acquisition of an automated information system (either as a
product or a service) if:

  The program is designated by the Secretary of Defense, or a designee of the Secretary, as a
MAIS program; or

   The dollar value of the program is estimated to exceed:

       $32,000,000 in fiscal year (FY) 2000 constant dollars for all program costs in a single
FY;

       $126,000,000 in FY 2000 constant dollars for all program acquisition costs for the entire
program; or

        $378,000,000 in FY 2000 constant dollars for the total life cycle costs of the program
(including operation and maintenance costs).

MDAP

    A DoD acquisition program that is not a highly sensitive classified program (as determined
by the Secretary of Defense) and:

       That is designated by the Secretary of Defense as an MDAP; or

       That is estimated by the Secretary of Defense to require an eventual total expenditure for
research, development, test, and evaluation of more than $300,000,000 (based on FY 1990
constant dollars) or an eventual total expenditure for procurement of more than $1,800,000,000
(based on FY 1990 constant dollars).




Change 2, 08/31/2018               GLOSSARY17
                                                                 DoDD 3222.04, March 26, 2014


    The Secretary of Defense may adjust the amounts (and the base FY) provided in subsection
(a)(2) on the basis of DoD escalation rates. An adjustment under this subsection will be effective
after the Secretary transmits a written notification of the adjustment to the Committee on Armed
Services of the Senate and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives.

NAVWAR. Deliberate defensive and offensive action to assure and prevent positioning,
navigation, and timing information through coordinated employment of space, cyberspace, and
EW operations.




Change 2, 08/31/2018              GLOSSARY18
