                              Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE
                                                                             NUMBER 3115.13
                                                                               December 9, 2010
                                                         Incorporating Change 3, August 26, 2020

                                                                                        USD(I&S)

SUBJECT: DoD Support to the High-Value Detainee Interrogation Group (HIG)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for providing DoD
support to the HIG in accordance with the National Security Council “Charter for Operations of
Interagency High-Value Detainee Interrogation Group” (Reference (a)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The Department of Defense shall support the HIG, in accordance with applicable U.S. law
and policy, including Reference (a), DoD Directive 3115.09 (Reference (b)), U.S. Army Field
Manual 2-22.3, (Reference (c)), section 1385 of title 18, United States Code (Reference (d)),
DoD Instruction 3025.21 (Reference (e)), DoD 5240.1-R (Reference (f)), DoD Manual 5240.01
(Reference (g)), and DoD Directive 5148.13 (Reference (h)). All DoD administrative and
logistic support to non-DoD elements of the HIG shall be provided in accordance with DoD
Instruction 4000.19 (Reference (i)).

    b. DoD personnel selected to support the HIG on a permanent or temporary-duty basis shall
be assigned or attached to the DoD element of the HIG, as appropriate. DoD personnel assigned
or attached to the DoD element of the HIG shall report to and be accountable to the Director of
the HIG through the DoD Deputy Director of the HIG. DoD personnel shall remain subject to all
                                                               DoDD 3115.13, December 9, 2010

U.S. laws and policies that apply to DoD personnel. DoD personnel may exercise any DoD
authorities that have been delegated to them consistent with applicable U.S. law and policy.

   c. DoD personnel shall promptly report all reportable incidents through the DoD Deputy
Director of the HIG to the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), in accordance with
Reference (b).

    d. Within the United States, DoD personnel assigned or attached to the HIG shall not
provide direct assistance to civilian law enforcement authorities in civilian law enforcement
activities. Direct assistance includes active participation in civilian law enforcement activities
such as arrests, searches, seizures, or interrogations. This prohibition does not apply to DoD
personnel who participate in HIG interrogations for the military purpose of collecting foreign
intelligence (i.e., information relating to the capabilities, intentions, or activities of foreign
governments or elements thereof, foreign organizations, foreign persons, international terrorists,
or their agents), nor does it apply to DoD personnel who have been detailed to a civilian law
enforcement agency and are not subject to control by a military official.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The reporting requirements in this Directive are
exempt from review and approval procedures according to Paragraphs 1.b.(1), 1.b.(7), and
1.b.(8) of Enclosure 3 of Volume 1 of DoD Manual 8910.01 (Reference (j)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and
Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92, (Reference (k)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective December 9, 2010.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary



Change 3, 08/26/2020                             2
                                                                               DoDD 3115.13, December 9, 2010


                                                          ENCLOSURE 1

                                                          REFERENCES



(a)       National Security Council, “Charter for Operations of Interagency High-Value Detainee
          Interrogation Group,” April 19, 2010 1
(b)       DoD Directive 3115.09, “DoD Intelligence Interrogations, Detainee Debriefings, and
          Tactical Questioning,” October 11, 2012, as amended
(c)       U.S. Army Field Manual 2-22.3, “Human Intelligence Collector Operations,”
          September 6, 2006
(d)       Section 1385 of title 18, United States Code (also known as “The Posse Comitatus Act”)
(e)       DoD Instruction 3025.21, “Defense Support of Civilian Law Enforcement Agencies,”
          February 27, 2013
(f)       DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components
          That Affect United States Persons,” December 1982, as amended
(g)       DoD Manual 5240.01, “Procedures Governing the Conduct of DoD Intelligence
          Activities,” August 8, 2016
(h)       DoD Directive 5148.13, “Intelligence Oversight,” April 26, 2017
(i)       DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” April 25, 2013
(j)       DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
          DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(k)       Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
          December 20, 2019
(l)       DoD Instruction S-5200.42, “Defense Human Intelligence (HUMINT) and Related
          Intelligence Activities (U),” December 8, 2009, as amended




1
    Copies are available to authorized users on SIPRNET. Contact OUSD(I&S).



Change 3, 08/26/2020                                                3         ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDD 3115.13, December 9, 2010

                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                       RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE & SECURITY (USD(I&S)).
The USD(I&S) shall:

    a. Develop, coordinate, and oversee the implementation of DoD policy for DoD support to
the HIG.

   b. Serve as the DoD resource advocate for DoD support to the HIG.

    c. In consultation with the Heads of the DoD Components, determine the level of
administrative and logistic support, including personnel, that the Heads of the DoD Components
shall provide to the DoD element of the HIG to enable it to perform its mission effectively.

    d. Immediately notify the Secretary of Defense of all decisions to employ an MIT to
interrogate a high-value detainee.

    e. Monitor and assess the effectiveness of DoD support to the HIG and recommend changes
to DoD policy, doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel,
and facilities (DOTMLPF), as appropriate.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). In addition to the
responsibilities in section 7 of this enclosure, the Director, DIA, under the authority, direction,
and control of the USD(I&S), shall:

    a. Establish the DoD element of the HIG to which all DoD personnel who support the HIG
shall be assigned or attached, as appropriate.

   b. Manage DoD support to the HIG.

    c. Select and assign a senior executive-level official to serve as the DoD Deputy Director of
the HIG in accordance with Reference (a).

    d. Together with the Director or designated deputy-level officials of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and the Central Intelligence Agency, determine whether to employ a mobile
interrogation team (MIT) to interrogate a high-value detainee in accordance with Reference (a).

   e. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components and U.S. Government
(USG) agencies, or their designees, as necessary to carry out responsibilities assigned in this
Directive.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                              4           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 3115.13, December 9, 2010

    f. Enter into interservice and intragovernmental support agreements with the Heads of the
DoD Components and USG agencies in accordance with Reference (i) as necessary to carry out
responsibilities assigned in this Directive.

    g. Monitor and assess the effectiveness of DoD support to the HIG and recommend changes
to DoD policy and DOTMLPF, as appropriate.

   h. As General Defense Intelligence Program (GDIP) Manager:

       (1) Plan, program, and budget to fund all administrative and logistic support, including
personnel, provided to the DoD element of the HIG pursuant to section 1.c. of this Enclosure.

        (2) Coordinate all resource requests with the USD(I&S) and the Director of National
Intelligence, as appropriate, throughout all planning, programming, budgeting, and execution
phases and processes.

      (3) In consultation with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, realign existing
GDIP billets to meet the needs of the HIG.

    i. In collaboration with the Defense Human Intelligence (HUMINT) Executors, coordinate
the training of DoD personnel to meet HIG training requirements.

   j. Supervise the DoD Deputy Director of the HIG.

   k. Immediately notify the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the USD(I&S) of all
decisions to employ an MIT to interrogate a high-value detainee.

   l. Identify, integrate, and validate HIG requirements in support of National Intelligence
Program planning, programming, and budgeting processes.


3. GENERAL COUNSEL OF DIA. The General Counsel of DIA, in consultation with the
General Counsels of the DoD Components that provide support to the HIG, shall provide legal
advice to the DoD Deputy Director of the HIG on all matters related to DoD support to the HIG.

4. DoD DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF THE HIG. The DoD Deputy Director of the HIG, under the
authority, direction, and control of the Director, DIA, shall:

   a. Identify HIG training requirements for DoD personnel and provide these to the Director,
DIA or designee.

   b. Supervise DoD personnel assigned or attached to the DoD element of the HIG.

   c. Ensure that DoD personnel assigned or attached to the DoD element of the HIG comply
with applicable U.S. law and policy.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                            5           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDD 3115.13, December 9, 2010

    d. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components and USG agencies, or
their designees, as necessary to carry out responsibilities assigned in this Directive.

    e. Keep the Director, DIA, the Joint Staff Director for Intelligence (J-2), and the USD(I&S)
informed of significant HIG activities.

    f. Receive all requests for DoD support to the HIG, including permanent and temporary
personnel support. Process these requests in accordance with guidance issued by the Director,
DIA.

   g. Establish a process to ensure that relevant DoD intelligence requirements and target
nominations are provided to the HIG.

   h. Disseminate intelligence information derived from MIT interrogations to the DoD
Components in a timely manner and at the lowest appropriate classification level in accordance
with DoD Instruction S-5200.42 (Reference (l)).

  i. Request, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the approval of the geographic
Combatant Commander before the HIG employs an MIT to interrogate a high-value detainee in
DoD custody within the geographic Combatant Commander’s area of responsibility (AOR).

   j. Notify the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of impending MIT travel into a
geographic Combatant Commander’s AOR and provide operational updates, as appropriate.

   k. Notify the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the team composition of an MIT
preparing to travel into a geographic Combatant Commander’s AOR for Service notification
purposes.

   l. Coordinate MIT employments with the Senior Defense Official/Defense Attaché in the
country where the MIT will be employed.

    m. Consult the DIA General Counsel for legal advice on all matters related to DoD support
to the HIG, as required.

    n. Monitor and assess the effectiveness of DoD support to the HIG and recommend changes
to DoD policy and DOTMLPF, as appropriate.


5. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (GC, DoD). The GC,
DoD, shall provide legal advice to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, the OSD
Component Heads, and, as appropriate, the Heads of the other DoD Components on all matters
related to DoD support to the HIG.


6. DOD SENIOR INTELLIGENCE OVERSIGHT OFFICIAL (SIOO). The DoD SIOO
conducts staff assistance visits and inspections of the DoD element of the HIG to verify that



Change 3, 08/26/2020                            6           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 3115.13, December 9, 2010

personnel are in compliance with U.S. law and policies governing the conduct of intelligence and
intelligence-related activities.


7. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

  a. Provide administrative and logistic support, including personnel, as funded by the GDIP
Manager, to the DoD element of the HIG.

    b. In consultation with the DoD Deputy Director of the HIG, identify, select, and assign or
attach qualified personnel to the DoD element of the HIG.

    c. Monitor and assess the effectiveness of DoD support to the HIG and recommend changes
to DoD policy and DOTMLPF, as appropriate.


8. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. In addition to the responsibilities in
section 7 of this enclosure, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

    a. Coordinate with the geographic Combatant Commander before the HIG employs an MIT
to interrogate a high-value detainee in DoD custody within the geographic Combatant
Commander’s AOR.

  b. Notify affected geographic Combatant Commanders of impending MIT travel into their
AORs and provide operational updates, as appropriate.

    c. Notify the Service Chiefs of the impending travel of their personnel outside the United
States.


9. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. In addition to the responsibilities
in section 7 of this enclosure, the Commanders of the Combatant Commands shall:

    a. Exercise approval authority over HIG requests to send an MIT to interrogate a high-value
detainee in DoD custody within their respective AOR.

    b. Ensure that MIT interrogations of detainees in DoD custody within their respective AOR
are conducted in accordance with References (b) and (c).

    c. Notify the DoD Deputy Director of the HIG, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, when a high-value individual has been detained or when operations are underway to detain
such an individual.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                            7           ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 3115.13, December 9, 2010

                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AOR           area of responsibility
ATSD(IO)      Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Oversight


DIA     Defense Intelligence Agency
DOTMLPF doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education,
        personnel, and facilities


GC, DoD       General Counsel of the Department of Defense
GDIP          General Defense Intelligence Program


HIG           High-Value Detainee Interrogation Group
HUMINT        human intelligence


J-2           Joint Staff Directorate for Intelligence


MIT           mobile interrogation team


USD(I&S)      Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
USG           United States Government


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

Defense HUMINT Executor. The senior DoD intelligence officials as designated by the Heads
of the DoD Components who are authorized to conduct HUMINT and related intelligence
activities, i.e., DIA Deputy Director of Human Intelligence and the senior intelligence officials
as designated by the Secretaries of the Military Departments for the Army, Navy, Air Force, and
Marine Corps, and by the Commanders of the Combatant Commands.

DoD element of the HIG. A subordinate element of the DIA to which all DoD permanent and
temporary duty personnel selected to support the HIG are assigned or attached for DoD
administration and support.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                             8                   GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDD 3115.13, December 9, 2010

HIG. The interagency body under the administrative control of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation that was established to assemble and dispatch mobile interrogation teams to
interrogate high-value detainees.

high-value detainee. A high-value individual who is in U.S. or foreign custody.

high-value individual. An individual who is assessed by the HIG to possess information about:
terrorist threats to the United States or its allies; the location of high-value terrorism subjects,
particularly the leadership of terrorist groups that pose a threat to the United States or its allies;
strategic-level plans or intentions of any terrorist or insurgent entity directing operations against
deployed U.S. or allied forces; or strategic level knowledge of the organization, structure,
leadership and key operatives, financial support, and communications methods of designated
foreign terrorist organizations.

mobile interrogation team. An interagency team of expert interrogators, analysts, subject-matter
experts, behavioral science experts, interpreters, and other support personnel that is organized,
trained, equipped, and dispatched by the HIG to interrogate high-value detainees.

personnel. A civilian employee or military member from either an Active or Reserve
Component.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                               9                   GLOSSARY
