                           Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 5010.41
                                                                              September 12, 2005

                                                                                          DOT&E

SUBJECT: Joint Test and Evaluation (JT&E) Program

References: (a) DoD Directive 5010.41, “Joint Test and Evaluation (JT&E) Program,”
                February 23, 1998 (hereby canceled)
            (b) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DoD Directives Review –
                Phase II,” July 13, 2005
            (c) DoD Directive 5000.1, "Defense Acquisition," May 12, 2003
            (d) Section 139 of title 10, United States Code


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Instruction reissues reference (a) as a DoD Instruction according to the guidance in
reference (b). It updates the policies and responsibilities for the DoD Joint Test and Evaluation
(JT&E) Program.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

This Instruction:

    2.1. Applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all
other organizational entities of the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as
the “DoD Components").

   2.2. Provides policies and assigns responsibilities for the management of the DoD JT&E
Program.
                                                                   DoDI 5010.41, September 12, 2005




3. DEFINITION

Joint Test and Evaluation Program (JT&E). The program that provides quantitative operational
test and evaluation (OT&E) information used for analyzing joint military capabilities and
develops potential options for increasing military effectiveness. This program complements the
acquisition process under DoD Directive 5000.1 (reference (c)). A JT&E is OT&E that brings
two or more Military Departments or other Components together to:

    3.1. Assess Service interoperability in joint operations and explore potential solutions to
identified problems.

   3.2. Evaluate joint technical and operational concepts, and recommend improvements.

   3.3. Increase joint mission capability, using quantitative data for analysis.

   3.4. Validate operational testing methodologies that have joint applications.

   3.5. Improve modeling and simulation validity with field exercise data.

   3.6. Provide feedback to the acquisition and joint operations communities.

   3.7. Improve joint tactics, techniques, and procedures.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy that the JT&E Program shall:

   4.1. Be executed by the Director, Operational Test and Evaluation.

   4.2. Perform feasibility studies to assess the need and feasibility of resolving the issues
and/or problems through conduct of a JT&E.

    4.3. Conduct joint operational tests to resolve issues and problems validated by a feasibility
study.

   4.4. Conduct Quick Reaction Tests (QRTs) when there is an urgent requirement.




                                                 2
                                                                 DoDI 5010.41, September 12, 2005




5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    5.1. The Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, in addition to the assigned
responsibilities under reference (c), shall:

       5.1.1. Oversee the JT&E Program.

        5.1.2. Convene an Executive Steering Group (ESG) for QRTs, and a Senior Advisory
Council (SAC) and Technical Advisory Board (TAB) for JT&Es, all of which shall comprise
only full-time officers and employees of the Federal Government, to assist in the nomination,
selection, and approval processes.

       5.1.3. Chair the ESG and SAC.

       5.1.4. Designate the Chair for the TAB.

        5.1.5. Plan, program, budget, and fund costs unique to the JT&E Program and those
costs incurred only as a result of conducting a joint test or QRT.

   5.2. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics shall
provide representatives to the ESG (non-voting member), SAC, and TAB, and as applicable,
nominate JT&Es.

    5.3. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness shall provide a
representative to the SAC.

   5.4. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs and the Under Secretary of
Defense (Comptroller) shall provide representatives to the ESG, SAC, and TAB as required.

   5.5. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration/
DoD Chief Information Officer shall provide representatives to the SAC and TAB, and as
applicable, nominate JT&Es.

  5.6. The Director Program Analysis and Evaluation shall provide a representative to the
SAC, and as applicable, nominate JT&Es.

   5.7. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

      5.7.1. Provide representatives to the ESG, SAC, and the TAB, and as applicable,
nominate JT&Es.

       5.7.2. Plan, program, and provide necessary personnel, resources, and funds not provided
by the DOT&E to support the JT&E program when sponsoring a JT&E test. This includes
personnel, facilities, and other resources not uniquely required for QRTs, Joint Feasibility
Studies, and JT&Es. A headquarters site and pay for civilian personnel, travel (for other than


                                                 3
                                                                    DoDI 5010.41, September 12, 2005



JT&E staff members), transportation, utilities and rents, Service-owned equipment maintenance,
supplies, printing and reproduction, and communications are funded by the Military
Departments.

   5.8. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

      5.8.1. Provide joint staff representatives to the ESG and the SAC, and as applicable,
nominate JT&Es.

        5.8.2. Advise the DOT&E, through representatives, on JT&E and QRT nominations
related to joint doctrine or mission; assess the potential impact of nominated tests, in
coordination with the Combatant Commanders; assist in coordination of the JT&E Program with
joint exercises; and assist in applying joint test results.

    5.9. The Commanders of the Combatant Commands (COCOMs), through the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:

      5.9.1. Provide, at the invitation of the DOT&E, representatives to the ESG, SAC, and
TAB, and as applicable, nominate JT&Es.

        5.9.2. Advise, through representatives, the DOT&E on JT&E nominations related to
joint doctrine or mission; assess the potential impact of nominated tests; assist in coordination of
the JT&E Program with joint exercises; and assist in applying joint test results.

       5.9.3. Plan, program, and provide necessary personnel, resources, and funds not provided
by the DOT&E to support the JT&E program when sponsoring a JT&E test. This includes
personnel, facilities, and other resources not uniquely required for a QRT, JFS, and joint tests. A
headquarters site and pay for civilian personnel, travel (for other than JT&E staff members),
transportation, utilities and rents, COCOM-owned equipment maintenance, supplies, printing
and reproduction, and communications are funded by the COCOM.


6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




                                                  David Duma
                                                  Principal Deputy, DOT&E




                                                 4
