Executive Orders | National Archives 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 Top 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 The U.S. National Archives Home 

 
 
 
 Citizen Archivists &middot;
 
 Bookmark/Share 
 &middot;
 Contact Us 

 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 Main menu Research Our Records 
 Veterans&#039; Service Records 
 Educator Resources 
 Visit Us 
 America&#039;s Founding Documents 
 
 
 
 
 
 Office of the Federal Register (OFR) 
 
 Home > OFR > Codification > Executive Orders 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Codification 

 
 
 About the Codification 
 

 
 Alphabetical Index 
 

 
 Chapter Index 
 

 
 Numeric Index 
 

 
 
 
 

 Search the Codification 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 Executive Orders 
 

 Executive Order 10865--Safeguarding classified information within industry 
 Source: The provisions of Executive Order 10865 of Feb. 20, 1960, appear at 25 FR 1583, 3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 398, unless otherwise noted. 
 Cross reference: See Executive 
 Order 11633 of Dec. 3, 1971, Chapter 22, for application of the provisions 
 of Executive Order 10865 to a security clearance program for United States 
 citizens employed directly by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the 
 Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, and the Central Treaty Organization. 
 
 WHEREAS it is mandatory that the United States protect itself against hostile or destructive activities by preventing unauthorized disclosures of classified information relating to the national defense; and 
 WHEREAS it is a fundamental principle of our Government to protect the interests of individuals against unreasonable or unwarranted encroachment; and 
 WHEREAS I find that the provisions and procedures prescribed by this order are necessary to assure the preservation of the integrity of classified defense information and to protect the national interest; and 
 WHEREAS I find that those provisions and procedures recognize the interest of individuals affected thereby and provide maximum possible safeguards to protect such interests: 
 NOW, THEREFORE, under and by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and statutes of the United States, and as President of the United States and as Commander in Chief of the armed forces of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows: 
 Section 1. (a) The Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Commissioners of the Atomic Energy Commission, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the Secretary of Transportation, respectively, shall, by regulation, prescribe such specific requirements, restrictions, and other safeguards as they consider necessary to protect (1) releases of classified information to or within United States industry that relate to bidding on, or the negotiation, award, performance, or termination of, contracts with their respective agencies, and (2) other releases of classified information to or within industry that such agencies have responsibility for safeguarding. So far as possible, regulations prescribed by them under this order shall be uniform and provide for full cooperation among the agencies concerned. 
(b) Under agreement between the Department of Defense and any other department or agency of the United States, including, but not limited to, those referred to in subsection (c) of this section, regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense under subsection (a) of this section may be extended to apply to protect releases (1) of classified information to or within United States industry that relate to bidding on, or the negotiation, award, performance, or termination of, contracts with such other department or agency, and (2) other releases of classified information to or within industry which such other department or agency has responsibility for safeguarding. 
(c) When used in this order, the term "head of a department" means the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Commissioners of the Atomic Energy Commission, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Secretary of Transportation, the head of any other department or agency of the United States with which the Department of Defense makes an agreement under subsection (b) of this section, and, in sections 4 and 8, includes the Attorney General. The term "department" means the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Transportation, any other department or agency of the United States with which the Department of Defense makes an agreement under subsection (b) of this section, and, in sections 4 and 8, includes the Department of Justice. 
 [Sec. 1 amended by EO 10909 of Jan. 17, 1961, 26 FR 508, 3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 437; EO 11382 of Nov. 28, 1967, 32 FR 16247, 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 691] 
 Sec. 2. An authorization for access to classified information may be granted by the head of a department or his designee, including but not limited to those officials named in section 8 of this order, to an individual, hereinafter termed an "applicant", for a specific classification category only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so. 
 Sec. 3. Except as provided in section 9 of this order, an authorization for access to a specific classification category may not be finally denied or revoked by the head of a department or his designee, including, but not limited to, those officials named in section 8 of this order, unless the applicant has been given the following: 
(1) A written statement of the reasons why his access authorization may be denied or revoked, which shall be as comprehensive and detailed as the national security permits. 
(2) A reasonable opportunity to reply in writing under oath or affirmation to the statement of reasons. 
(3) After he has filed under oath or affirmation a written reply to the statement of reasons, the form and sufficiency of which may be prescribed by regulations issued by the head of the department concerned, an opportunity to appear personally before the head of the department concerned or his designee, including, but not limited to, those officials named in section 8 of this order, for the purpose of supporting his eligibility for access authorization and to present evidence on his behalf. 
(4) A reasonable time to prepare for that appearance. 
(5) An opportunity to be represented by counsel. 
(6) An opportunity to cross-examine persons either orally or through written interrogatories in accordance with section 4 on matters not relating to the characterization in the statement of reasons of any organization or individual other than the applicant. 
(7) A written notice of the final decision in his case which, if adverse, shall specify whether the head of the department or his designee, including, but not limited to, those officials named in section 8 of this order, found for or against him with respect to each allegation in the statement of reasons. 
 Sec. 4. (a) An applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to cross-examine persons who have made oral or written statements adverse to the applicant relating to a controverted issue except that any such statement may be received and considered without affording such opportunity in the circumstances described in either of the following paragraphs:
 (1) The head of the department supplying the statement certifies that the person who furnished the information is a confidential informant who has been engaged in obtaining intelligence information for the Government and that disclosure of his identity would be substantially harmful to the national interest.
 (2) The head of the department concerned or his special designee for that particular purpose has preliminarily determined, after considering information furnished by the investigative agency involved as to the reliability of the person and the accuracy of the statement concerned, that the statement concerned appears to be reliable and material, and the head of the department or such special designee has determined that failure to receive and consider such statement would, in view of the level of access sought, be substantially harmful to the national security and that the person who furnished the information cannot appear to testify (A) due to death, severe illness, or similar cause, in which case the identity of the person and the information to be considered shall be made available to the applicant, or (B) due to some other cause determined by the head of the department to be good and sufficient.
 (b) Whenever procedures under paragraphs (1) or (2) of subsection (a) of this section are used (1) the applicant shall be given a summary of the information which shall be as comprehensive and detailed as the national security permits, (2) appropriate consideration shall be accorded to the fact that the applicant did not have an opportunity to cross-examine such person or persons, and (3) a final determination adverse to the applicant shall be made only by the head of the department based upon his personal review of the case. Sec. 5. (a) Records compiled in the regular course of business, or other physical evidence other than investigative reports, may be received and considered subject to rebuttal without authenticating witnesses, provided that such information has been furnished to the department concerned by an investigative agency pursuant to its responsibilities in connection with assisting the head of the department concerned to safeguard classified information within industry pursuant to this order. 
(b) Records compiled in the regular course of business, or other physical evidence other than investigative reports, relating to a controverted issue which, because they are classified, may not be inspected by the applicant, may be received and considered provided that: (1) the head of the department concerned or his special designee for that purpose has made a preliminary determination that such physical evidence appears to be material, (2) the head of the department concerned or such designee has made a determination that failure to receive and consider such physical evidence would, in view of the level of access sought, be substantially harmful to the national security, and (3) to the extent that the national security permits, a summary or description of such physical evidence is made available to the applicant. In every such case, information as to the authenticity and accuracy of such physical evidence furnished by the investigative agency involved shall be considered. In such instances a final determination adverse to the applicant shall be made only be the head of the department based upon his personal review of the case. 
 Sec. 6. The Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Secretary of Transportation, or his representative, or the head of any other department or agency of the United States with which the Department of Defense makes an agreement under section 1(b), or his representative, may issue, in appropriate cases, invitations and requests to appear and testify in order that the applicant may have the opportunity to cross-examine as provided by this order. Whenever a witness is so invited or requested to appear and testify at a proceeding and the witness is an officer or employee of the executive branch of the Government or a member of the armed forces of the United States, and the proceeding involves the activity in connection with which the witness is employed, travel expenses and per diem are authorized as provided by the Standardized Government Travel Regulations or the Joint Travel Regulations, as appropriate. In all other cases (including non-Government employees as well as officers or employees of the executive branch of the Government or members of the armed forces of the United States not covered by the foregoing sentence), transportation in kind and reimbursement for actual expenses are authorized in an amount not to exceed the amount payable under Standardized Government Travel Regulations. An office or employee of the executive branch of the Government or a member of the armed forces of the United States who is invited or requested to appear pursuant to this paragraph shall be deemed to be in the performance of his official duties. So far as the national security permits, the head of the investigative agency involved shall cooperate with the Secretary, the Administrator, or the head of the other department or agency, as the case may be, in identifying persons who have made statements adverse to the applicant and in assisting him in making them available for cross-examination. If a person so invited is an officer or employee of the executive branch of the Government or a member of the armed forces of the United States, the head of the department or agency concerned shall cooperate in making that person available for cross-examination. 
 [Sec. 6 amended by EO 10909 of Jan. 17, 1961, 26 FR 508, 3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 437; EO 11382 of Nov. 28, 1967, 32 FR 16247, 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 691] 
 Sec. 7. Any determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned. 
 Sec. 8. Except as otherwise specified in the preceding provisions of this order, any authority vested in the head of a department by this order may be delegated to the 
(1) Under Secretary of State or a Deputy Under Secretary of State, in the case of authority vested in the Secretary of State; 
(2) Deputy Secretary of Defense or an Assistant Secretary of Defense, in the case of authority vested in the Secretary of Defense; 
(3) General Manager of the Atomic Energy Commission, in the case of authority vested in the Commissioners of the Atomic Energy Commission; 
(4) Deputy Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, in the case of authority vested in the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 
(5) Under Secretary of Transportation, in the case of authority vested in the Secretary of Transportation; 
(6) Deputy Attorney General or an Assistant Attorney General, in the case of authority vested in the Attorney General; or 
(7) the deputy of that department, or the principal assistant to the head of that department, as the case may be, in the case of authority vested in the head of a department or agency of the United States with which the Department of Defense makes an agreement under section 1(b). 
 [Sec. 8 amended by EO 10909 of Jan. 17, 1961, 26 FR 508, 3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 437; EO 11382 of Nov. 28, 1967, 32 FR 16247, 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 691] 
 Sec. 9. Nothing contained in this order shall be deemed to limit or affect the responsibility and powers of the head of a department to deny or revoke access to a specific classification category if the security of the nation so requires. Such authority may not be delegated and may be exercised only when the head of a department determines that the procedures prescribed in sections 3, 4, and 5 cannot be invoked consistently with the national security and such determination shall be conclusive. 
 Editorial note: Executive Order 10865, insofar as it refers to functions of the Atomic Energy Commission, was modified by EO 12038 of Feb. 3, 1978, Chapter 10, p. , to provide that all such functions shall be exercised by (1) the Secretary of Energy to the extent consistent with the functions of the Atomic Energy Commission that were transferred to the Administrator of Energy Research and Development pursuant to the Energy Organization Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-438, 88 Stat. 1233), and (2) the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to the extent consistent with the functions of the Atomic Energy Commission that were transferred to the Commission by the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974. 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This page was last reviewed on August 15, 2016. 
 Contact us with questions or comments .
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Celebrating the Triumph of the American Spirit 
 
 Learn more 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Archives.gov 
 
 
 Information For&#8230; 
 
 
 Citizen Archivists 
 Federal Employees 
 Genealogists 
 Members of Congress 
 Preservation 
 Records Managers 
 The Press 
 
 
 
 
 Publications 
 
 
 Today's Federal Register 
 Prologue Magazine 
 Subscribe to Email Newsletters 
 Blogs 
 All Publications 
 
 
 
 
 Orgs. & Offices 
 
 
 Center for Legislative Archives 
 Federal Records Center 
 Office of the Federal Register 
 Office of the Inspector General 
 Presidential Libraries 
 Staff Directory 
 
 
 
 
 About Us 
 
 
 What is the National Archives? 
 National Archives by the Numbers 
 Doing Business with Us 
 Plans and Reports 
 Open Government 
 Our Plain Language Activities 
 
 
 
 
 I Want To&#8230; 
 
 
 Get My Military Record 
 Plan a Research Visit 
 Visit the National Archives 
 View Online Exhibits 
 Apply for a Grant 
 Research Presidential Records 
 View Highlights from Our Holdings 
 
 
 
 
 Participate 
 
 
 Attend an Event 
 Donate to the Archives 
 Work at the Archives 
 Volunteer at the Archives 
 Celebrate Freedom 250 
 
 
 
 
 Resources 
 
 
 A-Z Index 
 America's Founding Docs 
 Contact Us 
 Social Media 
 En Espa&ntilde;ol 
 FAQs 
 Forms 
 
 
 
 
 Shop Online 
 
 
 Visit the National Archives Store 
 Buy Reproductions and Microfilm 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 Connect With Us 

 
 Facebook 
 X 
 Instagram 
 Tumblr 
 YouTube 
 Blogs 
 Flickr 
 

 

 Contact Us · Accessibility · Privacy Policy · Freedom of Information Act · No FEAR Act · USA.gov 

 The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration 
 1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Top 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Modal Title -->
 &times; 
 
 
 
 Close 
 
 -->
