                           Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 5111.16
                                                                               October 27, 2005

                                                                                          USD(P)

SUBJECT: Policy and Strategy Committee

References: (a) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum “DoD Directives Review –
                Phase II,” July 13, 2005
            (b) DoD Directive 5105.18, “DoD Committee Management Program,”
                February 8, 1999

1. PURPOSE

Pursuant to the authority of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)) by reference (a),
this Instruction authorizes and establishes the Policy and Strategy Committee.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military
Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of
the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred
to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY

    3.1. It is DoD policy to foster and advance collaboration and coordination among the OSD
Principal Staff Assistants and the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff Principals.

    3.2. The Policy and Strategy Committee provides a valuable venue to initiate strategy and
policy actions and coordinate and oversee related implementation matters.

    3.3. The Policy and Strategy Committee shall advance the cohesion of the staffs of the OSD
and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the broad range of policy and strategy matters at the
discretion of the USD(P) and the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
                                                                            DoDI 5111.16, October 27, 2005




4. ORGANIZATION

The Policy and Strategy Committee:

    4.1. Is organized as a DoD committee pursuant to DoD Directive 5105.18 (reference (b)).
Staff support and operating costs shall be the responsibility of the co-chairs of the committee.

    4.2. Shall be co-chaired by the USD(P) and the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

   4.3. Permanent membership shall include the USD(P) and the Vice Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. Other members shall be determined by the co-chairs.

    4.4. Shall hold meetings at the call of the co-chairs.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

The USD(P) and the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

   5.1. Not less than weekly, convene meetings of the Policy and Strategy Committee for the
purposes of addressing:

       5.1.1. Policy and strategy matters of mutual interest and providing a venue to collaborate
on issues and provide coordinated guidance to the OSD and Joint Staffs.

         5.1.2. On-going and potential DoD operations and related issues.

         5.1.3. Matters posed by the Secretary of Defense or the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.

   5.2. Inform or make recommendations to the Secretary of Defense, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and other DoD officials on the matters addressed by the Policy and Strategy
Committee, as they determine appropriate.


6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




                                                  2
