                                 Department of Defense
                                   INSTRUCTION
                                                                             NUMBER 1322.10
                                                                                April 29, 2008

                                                                                     USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Policy on Graduate Education for Military Officers

References: (a) DoD Directive 1322.10, “Policy on Graduate Education for Military
                Officers,” August 26, 2004 (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Directives Program,” October 28, 2007
            (c) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” October 17, 2006
            (d) Section 2005 of title 10, United States Code
            (e) through (j), see Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction:

   1.1. Reissues Reference (a) as a DoD Instruction in accordance with the guidance in
Reference (b) and the authority in Reference (c).

   1.2. Continues to implement Reference (d) and updates policy, responsibilities, and
procedures for graduate education for military officers.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

This Instruction applies to:

    2.1. The Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the Office of the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department
of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”). The term “Military
Services,” as used herein, refers to the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps.

   2.2. All uniformed military officer personnel who are pursuing or have obtained a graduate
degree under a fully or partially funded program while on active duty, except those receiving
graduate education in health, law, or theology, which are disciplines covered in DoD Directives
6000.12 (Reference (e)), 1322.12 (Reference (f)), and 1304.19 (Reference (g)), respectively.
                                                                     DoDI 1322.10, April 29, 2008




3. DEFINITIONS

The terms used in this Instruction are defined in Enclosure 2.


4. POLICY

    4.1. It is DoD policy that funded graduate education programs shall be established for
uniformed military officer personnel of the Department of Defense. The intent of the
Department’s graduate education programs are to provide fully or partially funded educational
opportunities in disciplines that fulfill a present need, anticipated requirement, or future
capability and that contribute to the effectiveness of the Military Departments and the
Department of Defense.

   4.2. Graduate education programs shall be established to:

        4.2.1. Raise professional and technical competency, and develop the future capabilities
of military officers to more effectively perform their required duties and carry out their assigned
responsibilities.

       4.2.2. Provide developmental incentives for military officers with the ability, dedication,
and capacity for professional growth.

       4.2.3. Develop or enhance the capacity of the Department of Defense to fulfill a present
need, anticipated requirement, or future capability.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    5.1. The Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, under
the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall oversee graduate education
policy for military officers.

   5.2. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

       5.2.1. Ensure the applicability of graduate education within the context of ongoing
Military Department requirements and development of the total force.

        5.2.2. Ensure graduate education is provided to the highest caliber of personnel in areas
where an advanced degree of proficiency and/or readiness is instrumental to current mission or
future capability.

       5.2.3. Utilize military officers who have received fully or partially funded graduate
education in validated positions requiring advanced knowledge in that discipline.



                                                 2
                                                                     DoDI 1322.10, April 29, 2008



       5.2.4. Ensure graduate education programs develop critical thinking and decision-
making skills deemed vital in preparing military officers to work in the Service, joint,
interagency, and international environments.

        5.2.5. Assess their respective graduate education program posture to ensure a cadre of
highly qualified officers is developed and maintained in fields that fulfill present needs,
anticipated requirements, or future capabilities.

         5.2.6. Validate positions that require incumbents with graduate education and program
utilization tours for those officers who hold or are pursuing graduate degrees as the result of fully
or partially funded programs. Officers who have received a fully or partially funded graduate
degree shall serve on active duty for an amount of time as specified in paragraph E3.4. Officers
who hold an unfunded graduate degree are available, but not required, to serve in a validated
position.

        5.2.7. Assign officers who receive fully or partially funded graduate education to
validated positions as soon as practical. Ideally this is upon completion of the education. Ensure
that each officer holding a graduate degree serves in at least one position, and ideally as many as
appropriate to that degree, as Military Service requirements and career development permit.

        5.2.8. Audit the graduate education programs of their Military Department and provide
their assessments to the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness for review.
The assessment shall be submitted not later than November 30 of even numbered years. The
review shall be in narrative form and discuss the management of officers with graduate
education; the utilization rates for those produced as a result of fully or partially funded
programs; and the Service’s posture related to disciplines that fulfill a present need, anticipated
requirement, or future capability and that contribute to the effectiveness of the Military
Departments and the Department of Defense. Refer to guidance for validation in Enclosure 3 for
additional information.

        5.2.9. Require that officers who receive a fully or partially funded graduate educational
opportunity and who, voluntarily or because of misconduct, fail to complete the period of active
duty obligation specified in return for that educational opportunity, reimburse the United States
by the amount specified in paragraph E3.5.

         5.2.10. Require that officers who received fully or partially funded graduate education
and who fail to earn a graduate degree of the level and discipline for which they were selected, or
fail to obtain another validated graduate degree permitted by the Service, serve on active duty for
the time period specified in paragraph E3.4.

        5.2.11. Allow officers to pursue a graduate degree through a partially funded education
program for up to 12 consecutive months without an obligation for assignment to a designated
billet.




                                                 3
                                                                 DoDI 1322.10, April 29, 2008

       5.2.12. Encourage a lifelong continuum of learning by urging personnel not selected for
funded education to pursue unfunded education for its considerable professional and personal
value. Unfunded education is available through tuition assistance programs such as those
outlined in DoD Directive 1322.08E (Reference (h)) and chapter 30 of title 38, United States
Code (Reference (i)).


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS

The report referenced in paragraph 5.2.8. has been assigned Report Control Symbol DD-
P&R(AR)2313. The reports in Enclosure 3 are exempt from licensing in accordance with
paragraph C4.4.2. of DoD 8910.1-M (Reference (j)).


7. RELEASABILITY

UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release. Copies may be obtained through
the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




                                               David S. C. Chu
                                               Under Secretary of Defense for
                                               Personnel and Readiness

Enclosures - 3
 E1. References, continued
 E2. Definitions
 E3. Guidance for Validation of Graduate Education for Military Officers




                                               4
                                                              DoDI 1322.10, April 29, 2008

                                   E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                REFERENCES, continued


(e) DoD Directive 6000.12, “Health Services Operations and Readiness,” April 29, 1996
(f) DoD Directive 1322.12, “Funded Legal Education,” April 12, 2004
(g) DoD Directive 1304.19, “Appointment of Chaplains for the Military Departments,”
    June 11, 2004
(h) DoD Directive 1322.08E, “Voluntary Education Programs for Military Personnel,”
    January 3, 2005
(i) Chapter 30 of title 38, United States Code
(j) DoD 8910.1-M, “Department of Defense Procedures for Management of Information
    Requirements,” June 30, 1998
(k) Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Memorandum,
    “Repayment of Unearned Portions of Bonuses, Special Pays, and Educational Benefits,”
    September 18, 2007




                                            5                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDI 1322.10, April 29, 2008

                                      E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                                        DEFINITIONS


E2.1. Fully Funded. While pursuing a graduate degree, the military officer receives full pay and
allowances, with the majority of the tuition and other schooling costs being assumed or paid by
the U.S. Government or by another organization. The officer attends school instead of
performing usual military duties.

E2.2. Graduate Education. Studies beyond the bachelor’s or first professional degree that are
devoted to the utilization and advancement of knowledge.

E2.3. Military Officer. Military personnel in either the warrant officer or commissioned officer
grades.

E2.4. Partially Funded. While pursuing a graduate degree, the military officer receives full pay
and allowances with the majority of tuition and other schooling costs paid by the officer from
personal funds and/or benefits to which the military officer was entitled. The officer attends
school instead of performing usual military duties.

E2.5. Unfunded Education. While pursuing a graduate degree, the majority of tuition and other
schooling costs are paid by the officer from personal funds and/or benefits to which the officer
was entitled. The officer attends school during off-duty time.

E2.6. Validated Position. A position in which individuals possessing qualifications that
normally may be acquired only through graduate education in a relevant field of study optimally
perform the primary duties. (Such education shall enable the officer to comprehend theories,
principles, terminology, processes, and techniques that are necessary for critical thinking,
effective evaluation, supervision, or management of complex programs.) The two types of
validated positions are those in which the officer must possess graduate education to:

   E2.6.1. Conduct effective staff planning, coordination, command, and/or advisory functions.

   E2.6.2. Manage or exert direct technical supervision over military and/or civilian personnel
who are required to possess professional technical qualifications that may include graduate
education.




                                                6                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 1322.10, April 29, 2008

                                       E3. ENCLOSURE 3

     GUIDANCE FOR VALIDATION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION FOR MILITARY
                              OFFICERS


The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

   E3.1. Maintain sufficient data to validate positions requiring graduate education including at
a minimum:

       E3.1.1. Position title.

       E3.1.2. Required graduate discipline and degree level.

       E3.1.3. Organization and unit identification code.

       E3.1.4. Name, rank, degree level, and degree discipline of incumbent.

    E3.2. Maintain sufficient data to verify officers who hold or are pursuing a graduate degree
in the fully or partially funded program, including, at a minimum, the following:

       E3.2.1. Name and rank.

       E3.2.2. Graduate degree level and discipline.

       E3.2.3. Date degree was awarded.

       E3.2.4. Whether degree was fully or partially funded.

       E3.2.5. Number of months the officer has served in a validated position.

       E3.2.6. Validated position as outlined in criteria under paragraph E3.1.

     E3.3. No less than biennially, review the group of officers with advanced education. Ensure
an active and predictive program for funded graduate education is in place to meet present needs,
anticipated requirements, or future capabilities that contribute to the effectiveness of the Military
Departments and the Department of Defense. The review should include an evaluation of the
utilization rate of officers who have received fully or partially funded graduate education, a
review of validated billets requiring graduate education, the number of officers who have
obtained fully or partially funded graduate education, and the number of utilization tours those
officers have served. Comments on trends, corresponding policy, and/or statutory changes to
enhance the graduate education program are appropriate as deemed by the Secretary concerned.

    E3.4. Require via written agreement that the minimum active duty obligation of military
officers who have received fully or partially funded graduate education shall be a period equal to



                                                 7                                  ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 1322.10, April 29, 2008

three times the number of months of education completed during the first year of graduate
school, unless a different period of time is prescribed by law. An active duty obligation is
incurred whether the member successfully completes the fully funded graduate degree, or fails to
earn the fully funded graduate degree. Additional service obligation for such education in excess
of 12 months shall be as prescribed by each Military Department, as stated in a written
agreement with each officer.

    E3.5. Failure to fulfill the requirements or specified conditions of the agreement for receipt
of educational benefits may result in termination of the agreement and the member may be
required to repay the United States the unearned portion of the benefit in accordance with
Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Memorandum
(Reference (k)). The Secretary of the Military Department concerned shall advise Defense
Finance and Accounting Service of the disposition of any unearned portion of the educational
benefit.




                                                 8                                 ENCLOSURE 3
