                                 Department of Defense

                                   DIRECTIVE
                                                                               NUMBER 5200.27
                                                                                 January 7, 1980



                                                                                            USD(P)

SUBJECT: Acquisition of Information Concerning Persons and Organizations not Affiliated
         with the Department of Defense

References: (a) DoD Directive 5200.27, subject as above, December 8, 1975 (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Directive 5240.1, "Activities of DoD Intelligence Components that Affect
                U.S. Persons," November 30, 1979


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive reissues reference (a) to establish for the Defense Investigative Program general
policy, limitations, procedures, and operational guidance pertaining to the collecting, processing,
storing, and disseminating of information concerning persons and organizations not affiliated
with the Department of Defense.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

     2.1. Except as provided by paragraph 2.3., below, this Directive is applicable to the Office
of the Secretary of Defense, Military Departments, Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Unified
and Specified Commands, and the Defense Agencies (hereafter referred to as "DoD
Components").

     2.2. The provisions of this Directive encompass the acquisition of information concerning
the activities of:

          2.2.1. Persons and organizations, not affiliated with the Department of Defense, within
the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and U.S. territories
and possessions; and

          2.2.2. Non-DoD-affiliated U.S. citizens anywhere in the world.
                                                                   DoDD 5200.27, January 7, 1980


     2.3. This Directive is not applicable to DoD intelligence components as defined by DoD
Directive 5240.1 (reference (b)).

     2.4. Authority to act for the Secretary of Defense in matters in this Directive that require
specific approval are delineated in enclosure 1.


3. POLICY

     3.1. DoD policy prohibits collecting, reporting, processing, or storing information on
individuals or organizations not affiliated with the Department of Defense, except in those
limited circumstances where such information is essential to the accomplishment of the DoD
missions outlined below.

     3.2. Information-gathering activities shall be subject to overall civilian control, a high level
of general supervision and frequent inspections at the field level.

     3.3. Where collection activities are authorized to meet an essential requirement for
information, maximum reliance shall be placed upon domestic civilian investigative agencies,
Federal, State, and local.

     3.4. In applying the criteria for the acquisition and retention of information established
pursuant to this Directive, due consideration shall be given to the need to protect DoD functions
and property in the different circumstances existing in geographic areas outside the United
States. Relevant factors include:

          3.4.1. The level of disruptive activity against U.S. Forces;

          3.4.2. The competence of host-country investigative agencies;

          3.4.3. The degree to which U.S. Military and host-country agencies exchange
investigative information;

          3.4.4. The absence of other U.S. investigative capabilities; and

          3.4.5. The unique and vulnerable position of U.S. Forces abroad.


4. AUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES

The DoD Components are authorized to gather information essential to the accomplishment of
the following defense missions:




                                                  2
                                                                  DoDD 5200.27, January 7, 1980


     4.1. Protection of DoD Functions and Property. Information may be acquired about
activities threatening defense military and civilian personnel and defense activities and
installations, including vessels, aircraft, communications equipment, and supplies. Only the
following types of activities justify acquisition of information under the authority of this
paragraph:

          4.1.1. Subversion of loyalty, discipline, or morale of DoD military or civilian
personnel by actively encouraging violation of law, disobedience of lawful order or regulation,
or disruption of military activities.

            4.1.2. Theft of arms, ammunition, or equipment, or destruction or sabotage of
facilities, equipment, or records belonging to DoD units or installations.

           4.1.3. Acts jeopardizing the security of DoD elements or operations or compromising
classified defense information by unauthorized disclosure or by espionage.

          4.1.4. Unauthorized demonstrations on Active or Reserve DoD installations.

           4.1.5. Direct threats to DoD military or civilian personnel in connection with their
official duties or to other persons who have been authorized protection by DoD resources.

         4.1.6. Activities endangering facilities that have classified defense contracts or that
have been officially designated as key defense facilities.

          4.1.7. Crimes for which the Department of Defense has responsibility for investigating
or prosecuting.

     4.2. Personnel Security. Investigations may be conducted in relation to the following
categories of persons:

         4.2.1. Members of the Armed Forces, including retired personnel, members of the
Reserve components, and applicants for commission or enlistment.

          4.2.2. DoD civilian personnel and applicants for such status.

           4.2.3. Persons having need for access to official information requiring protection in
the interest of national defense under the DoD Industrial Security Program or being considered
for participation in other authorized DoD programs.

     4.3. Operations Related to Civil Disturbance. The Attorney General is the chief civilian
officer in charge of coordinating all Federal Government activities relating to civil disturbances.
Upon specific prior authorization of the Secretary of Defense or his designee, information may
be acquired that is essential to meet operational requirements flowing from the mission assigned
to the Department of Defense to assist civil authorities in dealing with civil disturbances. Such



                                                 3
                                                                   DoDD 5200.27, January 7, 1980


authorization will only be granted when there is a distinct threat of a civil disturbance exceeding
the law enforcement capabilities of State and local authorities.


5. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES

     5.1. The acquisition of information on individuals or organizations not affiliated with the
DoD will be restricted to that which is essential to the accomplishment of assigned DoD
missions under this Directive.

    5.2. No information shall be acquired about a person or organization solely because of
lawful advocacy of measures in opposition to Government policy.

     5.3. There shall be no physical or electronic surveillance of Federal, State, or local officials
or of candidates for such offices.

     5.4. There shall be no electronic surveillance of any individual or organization, except as
authorized by law.

    5.5. There shall be no covert or otherwise deceptive surveillance or penetration of civilian
organizations unless specifically authorized by the Secretary of Defense, or his designee.

     5.6. No DoD personnel will be assigned to attend public or private meetings,
demonstrations, or other similar activities for the purpose of acquiring information, the collection
of which is authorized by this Directive without specific prior approval by the Secretary of
Defense, or his designee. An exception to this policy may be made by the local commander
concerned, or higher authority, when, in his judgment, the threat is direct and immediate and
time precludes obtaining prior approval. In each such case a report will be made immediately to
the Secretary of Defense, or his designee.

    5.7. No computerized data banks shall be maintained relating to individuals or
organizations not affiliated with the Department of Defense, unless authorized by the Secretary
of Defense, or his designee.


6. OPERATIONAL GUIDANCE

     6.1. Nothing in this Directive shall be construed to prohibit the prompt reporting to law
enforcement agencies of any information indicating the existence of a threat to life or property,
or the violation of law, nor to prohibit keeping a record of such a report.

    6.2. Nothing in this Directive shall be construed to restrict the direct acquisition by overt
means of the following information:




                                                  4
                                                                    DoDD 5200.27, January 7, 1980


           6.2.1. Listings of Federal, State, and local officials who have official responsibilities
related to the control of civil disturbances. Such listings may be maintained currently.

            6.2.2. Physical data on vital public or private installations, facilities, highways, and
utilities, as appropriate, to carry out a mission assigned by this Directive.

    6.3. Access to information obtained under the provisions of this Directive shall be restricted
to Governmental Agencies that require such information in the execution of their duties.

     6.4. Information within the purview of this Directive, regardless of when acquired, shall be
destroyed within 90 days unless its retention is required by law or unless its retention is
specifically authorized under criteria established by the Secretary of Defense, or his designee.

    6.5. This Directive does not abrogate any provision of the Agreement Governing the
Conduct of Defense Department Counterintelligence Activities in Conjunction with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, April 5, 1979, nor preclude the collection of information required by
Federal statute or Executive order.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE AND IMPLEMENTATION

This Directive is effective immediately. Forward two copies of implementing regulations to the
Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Policy Review) within 120 days.




Enclosures - 1
  E1. Delegation of Authority




                                                   5
                                                                                DoDD 5200.27, January 7, 1980


                                                E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                       DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY



     E1.1.1. The Secretary of the Army is designated to authorize those activities delineated in
paragraph 4.3., basic Directive. This authority may not be further delegated to other than the
Under Secretary of the Army.

     E1.1.2. The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Policy Review) (DUSD(PR)) is
designated to authorize those activities delineated in paragraph 5.5., basic Directive, within the
50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and U.S. territories and
possessions. This authority may not be delegated. The investigating DoD Component, prior to
requesting approval for authorizations under this provision, shall coordinate prospective
activities with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

     E1.1.3. The DUSD(PR) and the Secretaries of the Military Departments are designated to
authorize those activities (delineated in paragraph 5.5., basic Directive) abroad1 when
membership of the civilian organization is reasonably expected to include a significant number
of non-DoD-affiliated U.S. citizens. This authority may not be further delegated to other than
the Under Secretaries of the Military Departments. When the Military Department Secretary or
Under Secretary exercises this delegation of authority, the DUSD(PR) shall be advised promptly.

     E1.1.4. The Secretaries of the Military Departments are designated to authorize in their
Departments those activities delineated in paragraph 5.6., basic Directive, within the 50 States,
the District of Columbia, the Common wealth of Puerto Rico, and U.S. territories and
possessions. This authority may not be further delegated to other than the Under Secretaries of
the Military Departments.

     E1.1.5. The Secretaries of the Military Departments are designated to authorize in their
Departments those activities (delineated in paragraph 5.6., basic Directive) abroad1 when a
significant number of non-DoD-affiliated U.S. citizens are expected to be present. This authority
may be further delegated, in writing, as circumstances warrant, to an authorized designee. The
DUSD(PR) will be notified immediately of such further delegations of authority. When the
Secretary or Under Secretary of a Military Department or his designee exercises this delegated
authority, the DUSD(PR) shall be advised promptly.

      E1.1.6. The DUSD(PR) is designated to authorize those activities delineated in paragraphs
5.7. and 6.4., basic Directive. These authorities may not be further delegated.

       ______________
1
    "Abroad" means "outside the United States, its territories, and possessions."




                                                            6                                 ENCLOSURE 1
