                            Department of Defense

                              DIRECTIVE
                                                                     NUMBER 5105.71
                                                                        March 8, 2004



                                                                                  DA&M

SUBJECT: Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center (TRMC)

References: (a) Sections 191, 196, and 113 of title 10, United States Code
            (b) DoD Directive 3200.11, "Major Range and Test Facility Base
                (MRTFB)," May 1, 2002
            (c) Section 2681 of title 10, United States Code
            (d) DoD 7000.14-R, "Department of Defense Financial Management
                Regulation," current edition
            (e) through (k), see enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE

Pursuant to sections 191 and 196 of reference (a) and the authorities vested in the
Secretary of Defense by section 113 of reference (a), this Directive establishes the
Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center (TRMC), with the mission,
responsibilities, functions, relationships, and authorities as prescribed herein.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense
(hereafter referred to collectively as "the DoD Components").


3. DEFINITION

DoD Test and Evaluation Resources Strategic Plan. A biennial strategic plan reflecting
the needs of the Department of Defense concerning test and evaluation (T&E) facilities
                                                          DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


and resources. Each strategic plan covers the period of 10 fiscal years beginning with the
fiscal year in which the plan is submitted.


4. MISSION

The TRMC shall plan for and assess the adequacy of the Major Range and Test Facility
Base (MRTFB), as defined by section 196 of reference (a) and, as described in DoD
Directive 3200.11 (reference (b)), to provide adequate testing in support of development,
acquisition, fielding, and sustainment of defense systems; and, maintain awareness of
other T&E facilities and resources, within and outside the Department, and their impacts
on DoD requirements.


5. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

     5.1. The TRMC is established as a DoD Field Activity under the authority,
direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology,
and Logistics (USD(AT&L)).

     5.2. The TRMC shall consist of a Director, a Deputy Director, and such subordinate
organizational elements as are established by the Director within resources authorized by
the Secretary of Defense.


6. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS

     6.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
shall:

          6.1.1. Provide policy direction and overall management oversight of the
TRMC.

           6.1.2. Transmit to the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on
Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, the report under subparagraph
6.2.2.4., below, together with any comments with respect to the report that the
USD(AT&L) considers appropriate, as required by subsection 196(d)(4) of reference (a).

     6.2. The Director, Test Resource Management Center, under the USD(AT&L),
shall:

         6.2.1. Serve as the principal advisor to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of
Defense and the USD(AT&L) on matters pertaining to strategic planning for and
assessment of the MRTFB. The Director provides reports and recommendations on


                                            2
                                                           DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


current and projected MRTFB infrastructure issues to ensure that adequate capabilities
exist to support testing of DoD acquisition programs.

           6.2.2. Complete a strategic plan reflecting the needs of the Department with
respect to T&E facilities and resources, not less often than once every 2 fiscal years, in
coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)), the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E), the Office of
the USD(AT&L) Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Installations and Environment,
the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and the Directors of the Defense Agencies
with T&E responsibilities.

              6.2.2.1. The strategic plan shall cover the period of 10 fiscal years
beginning with the fiscal year in which the plan is submitted.

                6.2.2.2. The strategic plan shall be based on a comprehensive review of
the Department's T&E requirements and the MRTFB, insight into all other T&E facilities
and resources, within and outside of the Department, and the adequacy of these facilities
and resources to meet those requirements. To facilitate cross-functional use of the
MRTFB, the plan shall also consider the needs of other DoD users, to include combat
readiness training.

                 6.2.2.3. The strategic plan shall include an assessment of the Department's
T&E requirements for the period covered by the plan, an identification of performance
measures associated with the successful achievement of T&E objectives for the period
covered by the plan, and an assessment of the T&E facilities and resources that shall be
needed to meet such requirements and satisfy such performance measures. The strategic
plan also shall include an assessment of the current state of the Department's T&E
facilities and resources, an itemization of acquisitions, upgrades, and improvements
necessary to ensure that the Department's T&E facilities and resources are adequate to
meet such requirements and satisfy such performance measures, and an assessment of the
budgetary resources necessary to implement such acquisitions, upgrades, and
improvements.

                6.2.2.4. Upon completing each strategic plan, the Director shall submit,
through the USD(AT&L), to the Secretary of Defense, a report on that plan. The report
shall include the plan and a description of the review on which the plan is based. Not
later than 60 days after the date on which the report is submitted, the Director shall
facilitate transmittal of the report by the USD(AT&L) under subparagraph 6.1.2., above.

             6.2.3. Review each proposed budget transmitted under paragraph 6.6., below,
and shall:

               6.2.3.1. Not later than January 31 of the year preceding the fiscal year for
which such budgets are proposed, submit, through the USD(AT&L), to the Secretary of
Defense, a report containing the comments of the Director concerning all such proposed


                                              3
                                                           DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


budgets, together with the Director's certification as to whether such proposed budgets
are adequate.

                6.2.3.2. Also submit, together with the report and certification, an
additional certification as to whether such proposed budgets provide balanced support to
the current strategic plan.

                6.2.3.3. Facilitate the submission by the Secretary of Defense, not later
than March 31 of the year preceding the fiscal year for which such budgets are proposed,
of a report to Congress on those proposed budgets that the Director has not certified
under subparagraph 6.2.3.1., above, to be adequate. The report shall include a discussion
of the actions that the Secretary proposes to take, together with any recommended
legislation that the Secretary considers appropriate, to address the inadequacy of the
proposed budgets and any additional comments that the Secretary considers appropriate
concerning the inadequacy of the proposed budgets.

           6.2.4. Support the Department's objective of ensuring that, by fiscal year 2006,
MRTFB institutional and overhead costs are fully funded through the Department's major
T&E investment accounts and other direct appropriations; and no more than the direct
costs for the use of the MRTFB are charged to DoD users. Charges for other U.S.
Governmental Agencies, State and local governments, allied foreign governments and
defense contractors shall be in accordance with 10 U.S.C. 2681 and DoD 7000.14-R
(references (c) and (d)).

           6.2.5. Issue guidance to the DoD Components, through the USD(AT&L), with
respect to MRTFB planning. Establish common performance standards across the
MRTFB to rationalize and prioritize future investments and establish clear capability
requirements.

          6.2.6. Maintain an awareness of other T&E facilities and resources, within and
outside the Department, and their impacts on DoD requirements. Serve as DoD lead for
such coordination with these entities, unless a DoD Executive Agent has been appointed
by the Secretary of Defense, in accordance with DoD Directive 5101.1 (reference (e)).

          6.2.7. Plan, organize, direct, and manage the TRMC and all assigned resources
consistent with this Directive.

          6.2.8. Administer the Central Test and Evaluation Investment Program and the
DoD Test and Evaluation Science and Technology Program, as prescribed by subsection
196(c)(4) of reference (a), when responsibility is assigned to the Director in accordance
with subsection 231(c) of Pub. L. No. 107-314 (2002) (reference (f)).

          6.2.9. Serve as principal public spokesperson for the TRMC.




                                             4
                                                            DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


           6.2.10. Promote coordination, cooperation, and understanding within the
Department of Defense (to include the training community), other Federal Agencies, and
the civilian community concerning TRMC matters.

         6.2.11. Serve on DoD, and other governmental, boards; committees; and
groups concerning TRMC activities, functions, and responsibilities.

         6.2.12. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Secretary and
Deputy Secretary of Defense or the USD(AT&L).

     6.3. The Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer
(USD(C)/CFO) shall support the Director, TRMC, as required to carry out his or her
responsibilities in certifying the adequacy of T&E budgets.

     6.4. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information
Integration/DoD Chief Information Officer shall, in conformance with DoD Directive
4630.5 (reference (g)), support the TRMC in assuring that strategic planning for adequate
resources for the MRTFB effectively and efficiently supports the early (and continuous,
as practical) assessment and certification of the interoperability and supportability of
Information Technology and National Security Systems.

     6.5. The Director of Operational Test and Evaluation shall coordinate International
Test and Evaluation Program resource and policy matters with the Director, TRMC.

     6.6. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Directors of Defense
Agencies with T&E responsibilities, through their respective OSD Principal Staff
Assistants, shall transmit such Secretary's or Director's proposed budget for T&E
activities for a fiscal year to the Director, TRMC for review under subparagraph 6.2.3.,
above, before submitting such proposed budget to the USD(C)/CFO.

     6.7. The Heads of the DoD Components shall provide support within their
respective fields of responsibilities, to the Director, TRMC, as required, to carry out the
responsibilities and functions assigned to TRMC.


7. RELATIONSHIPS

In the performance of assigned responsibilities and functions, the Director, TRMC, shall:

     7.1. Report directly to the USD(AT&L) without any intervening supervision.

    7.2. Keep the DoD Components fully informed concerning TRMC activities with
which they have collateral or related function.




                                              5
                                                          DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


     7.3. Coordinate with the DOT&E on all T&E facility and resource matters as
prescribed herein that impact DOT&E responsibilities as specified in DoD Directive
5141.2 (reference (h)).

     7.4. Coordinate all T&E facility and resource matters as prescribed herein that
impact Developmental Test and Evaluation, with the Office of the USD(AT&L) Deputy
Director, Defense Systems for Developmental Test and Evaluation.

     7.5. Coordinate with the USD(P&R) on all T&E facility and resource matters as
prescribed herein that impact training ranges and the training community.

     7.6. Establish and maintain appropriate liaison, consultation, and coordination with
designated DoD Executive Agents, T&E committees, and other governmental and non-
governmental agencies, as required, to exchange information in the fields of assigned
responsibility.

     7.7. Establish and maintain appropriate liaison, consultation, and coordination with
the Defense Test and Training Steering Group and the Test and Evaluation Executive
Agent Board of Directors, as required, to exchange information and advice in the fields of
assigned responsibility.

      7.8. Use existing facilities and services of the Department of Defense and other
Federal Agencies, whenever practicable, to avoid duplication and to achieve maximum
efficiency and economy.


8. AUTHORITIES

The Director, TRMC, is specifically delegated authority to:

     8.1. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, and acquisition
and technology development program offices, as necessary, to carry out assigned
functions and responsibilities, including the transmission of requests for advice and
assistance. Communications to the Military Departments shall be transmitted through the
Secretaries of the Military Departments, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law
or directed by the Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the
Commanders of the Combatant Commands, except in unusual circumstances, shall be
transmitted through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

     8.2. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the
Legislative Branch, members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments,
as appropriate, in carrying out assigned functions.

    8.3. Obtain reports and information, consistent with the policies and criteria of DoD
Directive 8910.1 (reference (i)), as necessary, to carry out assigned functions.


                                            6
                                                           DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


     8.4. Exercise the administrative authorities contained in enclosure 2.


9. ADMINISTRATION

      9.1. Consistent with section 196 of reference (a), the Director, TRMC shall be
selected from among commissioned officers of the Armed Forces on active duty or from
among senior civilian officers and employees of the Department of Defense. A
commissioned officer, while serving as the Director, holds the grade of lieutenant general
or, in the case of an officer of the Navy, vice admiral. A civilian officer or employee,
while serving as the Director, has a pay level equivalent in rank to lieutenant general.

           9.1.1. The Secretary of Defense will forward the name of the individual
selected to serve as the Director, TRMC, in the case of commissioned officers, to the
President. If the President approves the selection, the President will, if not already so
designated, designate the position "Director, Test Resource Management Center" as a
position of importance and responsibility under 10 U.S.C. 601 (reference (j)) and
authorize the designated position to carry the grade of lieutenant general or vice admiral,
as appropriate. If the President then nominates the selected officer for appointment to the
grade of lieutenant general or vice admiral, as appropriate, and, if that officer is
confirmed by the Senate and appointed by the President, the officer will be assigned to
the Director, TRMC position.

           9.1.2. The USD(AT&L) shall appoint the Director, TRMC, in the case of
civilian officers and employees.

     9.2. The USD(AT&L) shall appoint the Deputy Director, TRMC from among
senior civilian officers and employees of the Department of Defense who have substantial
experience in the field of T&E. Pursuant to section 196 of reference (a), the Deputy
Director shall act for, and exercise the powers of, the Director, when the Director is
absent, disabled, otherwise unavailable, or the position of Director is vacant, on any and
all matters for which the Director is authorized to act.

     9.3. The TRMC shall be authorized such personnel, facilities, funds, and other
resources as the Secretary of Defense deems necessary.

     9.4. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall assign military personnel to
the TRMC in accordance with approved authorizations and established procedures for
assignment to joint duty.

     9.5. Administrative support for the TRMC shall be provided by other DoD
Components through support and inter-Service agreements in accordance with DoD
Instruction 4000.19 (reference (k)).




                                             7
                                               DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


10. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 2
  E1. References, continued
  E2. Delegations of Authority




                                           8
                                                      DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


                               E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                            REFERENCES, continued


(e) DoD Directive 5101.1, "DoD Executive Agent," September 3, 2002
(f) Section 231 of Public Law 107-314, "Bob Stump National Defense Authorization
    Act for Fiscal Year 2003," December 2, 2002
(g) DoD Directive 4630.5, "Interoperability and Supportability of Information
    Technology and National Security Systems," January 11, 2002
(h) DoD Directive 5141.2, "Director of Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E),"
    May 25, 2000
(i) DoD Directive 8910.1, "Management and Control of Information Requirements,"
    June 11, 1993
(j) Section 601 of title 10, United States Code
(k) DoD Instruction 4000.19, "Interservice and Intergovernmental Support,"
    August 9, 1995




                                        9                          ENCLOSURE 1
                                                             DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


                                    E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                            DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY



     E2.1.1. Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to
the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), and in accordance with the DoD
policies, Directives, and Instructions, the Director, TRMC, or in the absence of the
Director, the person acting for the Director, is hereby delegated authority, as required in
the administration and operation of the TRMC, to:

         E2.1.1.1. Enforce regulatory procedures in accordance with Executive Order
10450, "Security Requirements for Government Employment," April 27, 1953, Executive
Order 12333, "United States Intelligence Activities," December 4, 1981, Executive Order
12968, "Access to Classified Information," August 2, 1995, and DoD Directive 5200.2,
as appropriate:

               E2.1.1.1.1. Designate any position in the TRMC as a "sensitive" position.

                E2.1.1.1.2. Authorize, in case of emergency, the appointment of a person
to a sensitive position in the TRMC for a limited time even though a full field
investigation or other appropriate investigation, including the National Agency Check,
has not been completed.

                 E2.1.1.1.3. Initiate personnel security investigations and, if necessary, in
the interest of national security, suspend a security clearance for personnel assigned,
detailed to, or employed by the TRMC. Any actions under this paragraph shall be taken
in accordance with DoD 5200.2-R.

          E2.1.1.2. Authorize and approve:

               E2.1.1.2.1. Temporary duty travel for assigned or detailed TRMC military
personnel in accordance with the Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1,
"Uniformed Service Members," current edition.

              E2.1.1.2.2. Travel for TRMC civilian personnel in accordance with Joint
Travel Regulations (JTR), Volume 2, "DoD Civilian Personnel," current edition.

                E2.1.1.2.3. Invitational travel to non-DoD personnel whose consultative,
advisory, or other highly specialized technical services are required in a capacity that is
directly related to, or in connection with, TRMC activities, in accordance with JTR,
Volume 2.




                                              10                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                            DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


              E2.1.1.2.4. Overtime work for TRMC civilian personnel in accordance
with Subchapter V of Chapter 55 of 5 U.S.C. and applicable OPM regulations.

           E2.1.1.3. Approve the expenditure of funds available for travel by assigned or
detailed TRMC military personnel for expenses incident to attending meetings of
technical, scientific, professional, or other similar organizations when the approval of the
Secretary of Defense or a designee is required by 37 U.S.C. 412 and 5 U.S.C. 4110 and
4111.

       E2.1.1.4. Develop, establish, and maintain an active and continuing Records
Management Program pursuant to 44 U.S.C. 3102 and DoD Directive 5015.2.

          E2.1.1.5. Utilize the Government purchase card for making micropurchases of
material and services, other than personal services, for the TRMC when it is determined
more advantageous and consistent with the best interests of the Government.

          E2.1.1.6. Authorize the publication of advertisements, notices, or proposals in
newspapers, magazines, or other public periodicals, as required for the TRMC
administration and operation, consistent with 44 U.S.C. 3702.

          E2.1.1.7. Establish and maintain, for the functions assigned, an appropriate
publications system for the promulgation of common supply and Service regulations,
instructions, and reference documents, and changes thereto, pursuant to the policies and
procedures prescribed in DoD 5025.1-M.

          E2.1.1.8. Enter into support and service agreements with the Military
Departments, other DoD Components, or other Federal Government Agencies, as
required, for the effective performance of TRMC responsibilities and functions.

          E2.1.1.9. Enter into and administer contracts through a Military Department, a
DoD contract administration services component, or other Federal Agency, as
appropriate, for supplies, equipment, and services required to accomplish the TRMC
mission.

          E2.1.1.10. Establish and maintain appropriate property accounts for the TRMC
and appoint Boards of Survey, approve reports of survey, relieve personal liability, and
drop accountability for TRMC property contained in the authorized property accounts
that has been lost, damaged, stolen, destroyed, or otherwise rendered unserviceable, in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

          E2.1.1.11. Promulgate the necessary security regulations for the protection of
property and places under the jurisdiction of the Director, TRMC, pursuant to DoD
Directive 5200.8.




                                             11                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                          DoDD 5105.71, March 8, 2004


          E2.1.1.12. Exercise the authority delegated to the Secretary of Defense by the
Administrator of the General Services Administration for the disposal of surplus personal
property.

     E2.1.2. The Director, TRMC, may redelegate these authorities as appropriate, and
in writing, except as otherwise indicated above or provided by law or regulation.




                                           12                           ENCLOSURE 2
