                             Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 3100.16
                                                                               January 26, 2009
                                                            Incorporating Change 1, May 8, 2017

                                                                                          USD(P)

SUBJECT: DoD Management of Space Professional Development

References: Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

    a. Pursuant to the authorities provided in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5101.02E (Reference (a)),
establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for managing and providing oversight of a cadre of
DoD space professionals (military and civilian) expert in space planning, programming,
acquisition, operations, requirements, science and technology, research and development, and
other space-related support disciplines.

   b. In accordance with U.S. Government Accountability Office Report to Congressional
Committees GAO-05-833 (Reference (b)), establishes a focused management approach for a
cadre of DoD space professionals by:

       (1) Institutionalizing management authorities and responsibilities for the cadre of DoD
space professionals.

       (2) Assisting the Military Departments in developing appropriate performance measures
and an evaluation plan to measure DoD progress in integrating and developing its cadre of space
professionals.

      (3) Monitoring Military Departments’ progress and providing periodic reports to senior
DoD leadership.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter
collectively referred to as the “DoD Components”). The term “Military Services,” as used
herein, refers to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.
                                                                  DoDD 3100.16, January 26, 2009




3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. A trained, educated, and experienced cadre of space professionals, expert in space
planning, programming, acquisition, operations, requirements, science and technology, research
and development, and other space-related support disciplines, will be available to develop,
acquire, and utilize space capabilities for the full spectrum of national security operations per
DoDD 3100.10 (Reference (c)).

    b. A results-oriented management approach for developing a cadre of space professionals
will be utilized to:

      (1) Clearly designate responsibility and thus accountability within the Department of
Defense for space professional development.

       (2) Develop and document DoD-wide space professional development competencies and
an evaluation plan to assess progress.

       (3) Develop and mandate the knowledge, skills, abilities, and competencies required for
space professional certification and determine how best to ensure training, education, and
professional development opportunities are available.

   c. Space cadre professional development shall be centrally managed by the DoD Executive
Agent (DoD EA) for Space in coordination with the Heads of the DoD Components.

    d. The space cadre activities of the space community will be synchronized to increase
efficiency and reduce unnecessary redundancies.

   e. Efforts will continue to improve the integration of space capabilities into joint warfighting
and intelligence operations by:

       (1) Increasing the levels of space education and training in appropriate Service and joint
professional military education courses.

        (2) Ensuring the right number of space professionals is assigned to joint and intelligence-
related duties to accomplish the mission.

      f. The most qualified and available space professionals will be assigned to critical positions
by:




Change 1, 05/08/2017                               2
                                                               DoDD 3100.16, January 26, 2009


       (1) Increasing the number of skilled, educated, and experienced space professionals
available to support the increasing amount of National Security Space planning, programming,
and acquisition activities.

       (2) Identifying critical positions and documenting what mix of skills, education,
experience, and leadership traits are necessary for success in those positions.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. INFORMATION COLLECTIONS. The reporting requirements in this Directive have been
assigned Report Control Symbol (RCS) DD-POL(A)2304 in accordance with Volume 1 of DoD
Manual 8910.01 (Reference (d)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Web Site at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and updates
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective January 26, 2009.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   Glossary




Change 1, 05/08/2017                            3
                                                                        DoDD 3100.16, January 26, 2009


                                               ENCLOSURE 1

                                               REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5101.02E, “DoD Executive Agent (EA) for Space,” January 25, 2013
(b) U.S. Government Accountability Office Report to Congressional Committees GAO-05-
    833, “Defense Space Activities: Management Guidance and Performance Measures
    Needed to Develop Personnel,” September 2005
(c) DoD Directive 3100.10, “Space Policy,” October 18, 2012, as amended
(d) DoD 8910.1-M, “Department of Defense Procedures for Management of Information
    Requirements,” June 30, 1998
(e) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” December 8,
    1999
(f) National Security Presidential Directive 49, “National Space Policy,” August 31, 2006 1
(g) DoD Directive 5144.02, “DoD Chief Information Officer (DoD CIO), November 21, 2014
(h) DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)),” October
    24, 2014, as amended
(i) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(j) DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
    Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(k) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “National Security Space Management and
    Organization,” October 18, 2001 2
(l) National Security Space Strategy2
(m) National Security Space Plan2
(n) National Security Space Program Assessment2
(o) Space Human Capital Resources Strategy, February 20042
(p) DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” April 25, 103




1
    Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President, http://www.ostp.gov
2
    National Security Space Office (NSSO), (703) 693-5223, 1670 Air Force Pentagon, Washington, DC 20330-1670


Change 1, 05/08/2017                                   4                           ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 3100.16, January 26, 2009


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P), in accordance
with (IAW) DoDD 5111.1 and National Security Presidential Directive 49 (References (e) and
(f)), shall serve as the overall Principal Staff Assistant and advisor to the Secretary and Deputy
Secretary of Defense and as DoD focal point for overall space professional cadre management
policies and procedures.

   a. Oversee preparation and submission of an annual report to the Secretary of Defense on the
space professional cadre status. USD(P) will issue a subsequent DoD Instruction to clarify
reporting requirements.

    b. Delegate departmental space cadre professional development management responsibilities
to the DoD EA for Space, with the exception of those career management responsibilities of the
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) for the space intelligence cadre and the
Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)) for the
space acquisition workforce.

    c. Ensure that management of space professionals is consistent with policies, plans, and
programs to ensure efficient and effective support of operations and contingency plans of U.S.
military forces.

   d. Coordinate with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD(P&R)) to ensure synchronization of training and education efforts.


2. DoD CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (DoD CIO). The DoD CIO shall advise and assist
the DoD EA in the management of space professionals as it pertains to non-intelligence, non-
acquisition space matters IAW DoDD 5144.1 (Reference (g)), including: space-based
communications programs; space-based information integration activities; space control
activities; operationally responsive space programs; space access; satellite control; lifecycle
management of spectrum and waveform; space-based position, navigation, and timing programs;
environmental sensing; and space launch ranges.


3. USD(I). The USD(I) shall:

   a. Coordinate with the Intelligence Community (IC) to identify IC best practices in
managing space professionals and ensure that DoD management of space professionals helps
produce a cadre that helps meet IC requirements.

    b. Per DoDD 5143.01 (Reference (h)), work closely with the DoD EA for Space regarding
the DoD EA’s DoD-wide responsibilities to represent and advocate for space interests (including



Change 1, 05/08/2017                            5                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDD 3100.16, January 26, 2009


space professional development) in the planning and programming processes and Defense
acquisition process, pursuant to Reference (c).

    c. Delegate professional development management responsibilities for intelligence space
professionals to the DoD EA for Space, but retain overall intelligence policy oversight
responsibility.


4. USD(P&R). The USD(P&R), IAW DoDD 5124.02 (Reference (i)), shall:

    a. Ensure that management of space professionals is consistent with policies, plans, and
programs for total force management and requirements to ensure effective and efficient support
of wartime and peacetime operations, contingency planning, and preparedness.

   b. Review the annual report to the Secretary of Defense, as required.

   c. Develop military training policy and oversee training for the space career force, in
coordination with the DoD EA for Space.


5. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L), IAW DoDD 5134.01 (Reference (j)), shall ensure that
management of space professionals is consistent with overall acquisition policies, plans, and
programs (including workforce development) for supporting the Combatant Commanders and
warfighters, in coordination with the USD(P) and USD(I).


6. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, IAW Reference (c), shall:

    a. Ensure that management of space professionals is consistent with the overall
responsibility of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to integrate space capabilities and applications into the
strategy, doctrine, concepts of operations, education, training, exercises, and operations and
contingency plans of U.S. military forces.

   b. Develop doctrine and formulate policies for the joint space training and education of the
Armed Forces.

    c. Identify billets in joint manpower documents that require the unique skills of space
professionals and the competencies required for each position.




Change 1, 05/08/2017                              6                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 3100.16, January 26, 2009


7. DOD EA FOR SPACE. The DoD EA for Space shall:

    a. Serve as the senior DoD official responsible for managing space professional development
as delegated by USD(P), consistent with this Directive.

   b. Provide an annual report through USD(P) to the Secretary of Defense on the state of the
space professional cadre in accordance with Secretary of Defense guidance (Reference (k)).

    c. Update the National Security Space Strategy (Reference (l)), National Security Space Plan
(Reference (m)), and National Security Space Program Assessment (Reference (n)) per the Space
Human Capital Resources Strategy (Reference (o)) to reflect the tasks, activities, issues, and
recommended initiatives associated with space professional management.

    d. Coordinate with each Military Service and the Joint Staff to develop DoD-wide performance
measures and an evaluation plan to measure and report results of space professional management
activities as outlined in Reference (b).

    e. Serve as the Chair of the DoD Space Professional Oversight Board (SPOB). The SPOB
will:

        (1) Serve as the senior DoD forum responsible to the DoD EA for Space in carrying out his or
her roles as described in this Directive and Reference (o).

        (2) Be represented, at a minimum, by personnel from the four Military Services, U.S.
Strategic Command, the USD(P), the USD(I), and the Joint Staff. Additional membership will
be determined by the Chair.

   f. Recommend to USD(P) DoD strategy to implement this Directive.

   g. Integrate and support Service space professional development efforts.

       (1) Assist Military Departments in execution of their responsibilities outlined in
paragraph 8 of this enclosure.

         (2) Facilitate inter-Service support agreements IAW DoD Instruction 4000.19
(Reference (p)), memorandums of understanding, and other necessary arrangements, as required,
to fulfill assigned responsibilities, functions, and authorities related to management of space
professional development.

       (3) Review and support Service space professional policy, requirements, and
development plans. Guide space professional development activities and recommend Service
investments in space professional development.

      (4) Collect, document, and distribute best practices among agencies and the Military
Departments.




Change 1, 05/08/2017                             7                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 3100.16, January 26, 2009


    h. Assess status of DoD space professional requirements, skills, competencies, education and
training, and quantities.

   i. Assess space-related industrial workforce status as it impacts DoD space professional
management.

   j. Coordinate major issues and activities with DoD stakeholders.

    k. Support space professional education and training by reviewing and guiding efforts in
core space training, professional military education, functional-unique curricula, graduate
education, and accession training. Coordinate joint issues and activities with the Office of the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.


8. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

    a. Develop and maintain a total force cadre of space professionals (military and civilian) to
assure that each Military Service retains the ability to develop, plan, program, acquire, operate,
and support space systems to fulfill Service and DoD mission requirements. This will include a
sufficient number of space professionals to fill joint space billets. (See Reference (k).)

   b. Integrate and incorporate DoD space professional development competencies into the
unique mission requirements of each Service.

    c. Manage the professional development, education, and training of Service space
professionals, in coordination with the DoD EA for Space.

   d. Establish an office responsible for space professional development.

    e. Coordinate with the DoD EA for Space and the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff to develop DoD-wide performance measures and an evaluation plan to measure the
success of Service space professional development programs. Notify the DoD EA for Space on
any key indicators reflecting the status of or changes to the cadre of space professionals.




Change 1, 05/08/2017                             8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 3100.16, January 26, 2009


                                           GLOSSARY

                                          DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

cadre of DoD space professionals. A total force composed of well-educated, motivated, and
competent people trained, educated, and experienced in: (a) operational demands of the space
medium; (b) the tactical environment they support; (c) the technical requirements of the vehicles
that operate in space and the ground systems supporting them; (d) the acquisition of space
systems; (e) space-related science and technology, and research and development; (f) space-
unique tactics, techniques, and procedures; (g) the needs of the many and varied end-users of
space capabilities; (h) the ability to formulate and articulate new space doctrine to fully control
and exploit the medium of space in support of U.S. security objectives; and (i) the DoD planning
and programming processes.

DoD Executive Agent. The Head of a DoD Component to whom the Secretary of Defense or the
Deputy Secretary of Defense has assigned specific responsibilities, functions, and authorities to
provide defined levels of support for operational missions, or administrative or other designated
activities that involve two or more of the DoD Components.

functional proponent. The OSD Principal Staff Assistant responsible for policy and oversight of
a particular functional area.

OSD Principal Staff Assistant. The Under Secretaries of Defense, the Director of Defense
Research and Engineering, the Assistant Secretaries of Defense, the General Counsel of the
Department of Defense, the Assistants to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the
OSD Directors or equivalents, who report directly to the Secretary of Defense or the Deputy
Secretary of Defense.




Change 1, 05/08/2017                             9                            GLOSSARY
