                                       Department of Defense
                                          INSTRUCTION
                                                                                           NUMBER 1322.27
                                                                                              April 13, 2007

                                                                                                     USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:        DoD Urban Training Facilities

References: (a) DoD Directive 1322.18, “Military Training,” September 3, 2004
            (b) Section 2859(d) of title 10, United States Code
            (c) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” October 17, 2006
            (d) Urban Training Facility Review Group Guidelines, April 6, 20071
            (e) through (j), see Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE AND SCOPE

In accordance with the responsibilities defined in References (a) and (b) and the authority in
Reference (c), this Instruction:

  1.1. Establishes an overarching Urban Training Facilities Strategy to synchronize individual
DoD Component strategies (see Reference (d)) and joint working groups.

    1.2. Establishes and implements policy and assigns responsibilities for evaluating and
certifying military projects to upgrade existing or construct new urban training facilities.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to:

    2.1. The Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”). The term “Military Services,” as used herein, refers to the Army, the
Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.



1
 Reference (d) is available through the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness,
Office of the Director, Readiness and Training Policy and Programs, Room 1E537, 4000 Defense Pentagon,
Washington, DC 20301-4000
                                                                   DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007

   2.2. All DoD facilities, existing or proposed, with the primary purpose of urban training.


3. DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this Instruction are defined in Enclosure 2.


4. POLICY

In accordance with Reference (b), it is DoD policy that all fiscal year proposals to construct new
or modify existing DoD Urban Training Facilities must be evaluated for compliance with this
Instruction, and the outcome of this evaluation reported annually as a certification to the
Congressional Defense Committees by the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness (USD(P&R)). All proposals to upgrade or construct new urban training facilities will
be evaluated regardless of which DoD appropriation is used. Only Military Construction
proposals for urban training facilities will be certified.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

   5.1. The USD(P&R) shall:

       5.1.1. Establish and provide oversight for the Urban Training Facilities Review Group
(UTFRG) to evaluate proposals for new Military Service urban training facilities, and
improvements to existing urban training facilities to ensure the efficient use of training resources,
and optimize integrated operations which includes the Military Services, joint, interagency,
intergovernmental, and multinational participation. The UTFRG will recommend certification of
proposed urban training facility projects that are consistent with this Instruction.

        5.1.2. Promulgate policy, develop the evaluation process, and facilitate Departmental
planning and coordination for the establishment and development of urban training facilities
using this Instruction, including the evaluation factors at Enclosure 4 and Reference (d).

        5.1.3. As provided for in the DoD Training Transformation Strategic Plan and the DoD
Training Transformation Implementation Plan (References (e) and (f) respectively), utilize the
Training Transformation (T2) Senior Advisory and Executive Steering Groups (SAG and ESG,
respectively) to annually validate and certify proposed urban training facility upgrades and new
construction.

       5.1.4. Provide a chairperson (GS-15/YX-3/O-6) from the Office of the Deputy Under
Secretary of Defense for Readiness (DUSD(R)) to act as chairman of the UTFRG.

        5.1.5. Facilitate cross-service utilization of urban training facilities by leveraging
existing DoD Component capabilities to identify, integrate, field, and sustain a Web-based
scheduling tool to provide availability and urban training facility operating agency contact
information for urban training facilities (local and regional).

                                                 2
                                                                    DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007

       5.1.6. Conduct periodic, bilateral coordination meetings between the Joint Urban
Operations Office (JUOO) and the UTFRG to ensure synchronization of efforts.

      5.1.7. Submit the annual Urban Training Facilities Certification report to Congress by
31 December for the next fiscal year.

      5.2. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

       5.2.1. Plan, program, and budget for Military Service urban training facility
requirements.

         5.2.2. Support the urban training facility proposal evaluation and certification process
by:

             5.2.2.1. Providing the appropriate level representation for the UTFRG, T2 SAG, and
ESG.

           5.2.2.2. Providing as the sponsor, urban training facility projects (new or
improvements) as proposed in the Budget Estimate for the proposal year and proposal year plus
one for evaluation and certification, and current year plus two for potential joint initiatives and
partnering. Information guidelines to enable coordination between user communities are
provided in Enclosure 3 of this Instruction. Also provide a copy of DD Form 1391, “Military
Construction Project Data,” for each urban training facility project.

        5.2.2.3. Sponsoring joint initiatives for urban training facilities as designated by the
UTFRG for funding in the T2 budgeting process.

              5.2.2.4. Providing and maintaining an annual inventory of existing urban training
facilities, including those of the Reserve components. This inventory should be shared with and
be accessible to the USD(P&R) and the other Military Departments as background to UTFRG
deliberations.

         5.2.3. Assist with identification, integration, fielding, and sustainment of a common
Web-based scheduling tool, which leverages existing DoD Component capabilities, to provide
availability and urban training facility operating agency contact information for urban training
facilities (local and regional).

       5.2.4. Satisfy Joint National Training Capability requirements for urban training facility
technical certification for U.S. Joint Forces Command (USJFCOM) accredited training programs
(Reference (g)) conducting joint task urban training on the facility.

      5.3. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

         5.3.1. Support the urban training facility proposal evaluation and certification process
by:

             5.3.1.1. Providing appropriate representation for the UTFRG, the T2 SAG, and ESG.

                                                  3
                                                                   DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007



           5.3.1.2. Providing as the sponsor of an urban training facility proposal, a general
project description, as outlined in Enclosure 3, for each urban training facility proposed for the
proposal year and the proposal year plus one.

       5.3.2. Coordinate the participation of, or represent, any Combatant Command supporting
an urban training facility in its area of responsibility.

   5.4. The Commander of USJFCOM, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:

       5.4.1. Support the urban facility proposal evaluation and certification process by:

           5.4.1.1. Providing appropriate representation for the UTFRG, T2 SAG, and ESG.

           5.4.1.2. Providing, as the sponsor, information, as explained in Enclosure 3, for each
urban training facility proposed for the proposal year and the proposal year plus one.

         5.4.1.3. Support periodic, bilateral coordination meetings between the JUOO and the
UTFRG to ensure synchronization of efforts.

       5.4.2. In accordance with Reference (g), conduct Joint National Training Capability
technical certification of DoD Component urban training facilities.

    5.5. The T2 ESG shall review, and modify as appropriate, the Congressional Certification
Report recommendations from the SAG and provide an overall certification recommendation to
the USD(P&R).

   5.6. The T2 SAG shall review, and modify as appropriate, the Congressional Certification
Report recommendations from the UTFRG and forward the outcome to the ESG.

   5.7. The UTFRG shall:

        5.7.1. Support the USD(P&R) by providing to the T2 SAG and ESG recommendations
for a certification report to Congress and Regional Urban Training Facility designations.

       5.7.2. Support development of an evaluation process.

       5.7.3. Develop and maintain Reference (d) to be approved by the DUSD(R).

       5.7.4. Recommend to DUSD(R) changes to procedures in Reference (d) to implement
the content of this Instruction in the resource allocation process.

       5.7.5. Review infrastructure requirements against the established evaluation factors in
Enclosure 4.

       5.7.6. Provide recommendations for changes to the evaluation factors in Enclosure 4.



                                                 4
                                                                   DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007

      5.7.7. Provide recommendations for infrastructure investment priorities to the T2 SAG
and ESG.


6. PROCEDURES

    6.1. The Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (h)) designated USJFCOM
as the Executive Agent for Joint Urban Operations. In order to synchronize DoD urban training
efforts, USJFCOM established the JUOO. Subsequently, the Joint Urban Operations Training
Working Group (JUOTWG) was established by USJFCOM Joint Force Trainer Memorandum
(Reference (i)). This Instruction establishes the UTFRG to facilitate synchronization of
individual DoD Component strategies and the various Urban Operations working groups, to
conduct the annual evaluation of urban facility proposals and to recommend certification of
military projects to upgrade existing or construct new urban training facilities to the T2 SAG and
ESG.

        6.1.1. The USJFCOM JUOO analyzes the urban related lessons learned and evaluates
current trends to ensure adequate modeling and simulation support for urban training.

        6.1.2. The USJFCOM JUOTWG was chartered to develop an overarching joint urban
training strategy, which incorporates existing Military Service urban training strategies, and
develops joint urban training requirements.

         6.1.3. The Office of the USD(P&R) UTFRG is charged with supporting urban training
facility oversight, with evaluation and certification by USD(P&R).

   6.2. Urban training facility plans and projects proposed by DoD Components will be
examined through in depth analysis of data and factors in the enclosures of this Instruction and in
guidelines established by the UTFRG and issued to the DoD Components. The goal of the
analysis is to ensure consistency with this Instruction.

    6.3. Urban training facilities shall be categorized as Local and/or Regional. Complete
definitions for these two categories are at Enclosure 2.

   6.4. The T2 ESG, on the recommendation of the SAG and UTFRG, shall designate Regional
Urban Training Facilities (RUTFs). Such facilities shall compete for joint funding where
appropriate and/or establish cost sharing agreements. Planning or designation attributes for
RUTFs are provided at Enclosure 2.

    6.5. The DoD Components, to the maximum extent possible, shall cooperatively use urban
training resources (e.g., facilities, ranges, maneuver areas, instrumentation and real time
feedback capabilities, and debriefing capability) and seek opportunities for co-use and integrated
operations with non-DoD users.

    6.6. The DoD Components will, when appropriate, virtually and/or physically link urban
training facilities to facilitate integrated urban operations over a large geographic area. Linkage
shall support both tactical and staff level training.

                                                 5
                                                                   DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007



   6.7. Objectives for urban training supported by DoD urban training facilities will include:

       6.7.1 Enabling integrated habitual operational/training relationships.

       6.7.2. Enabling synchronized rules of engagement for integrated operations.

        6.7.3. Enabling offensive and defensive operations against, traditional, irregular, and
distributed forces.

       6.7.4. Enabling Stabilization, Security, Transition, and Reconstruction Operations.

       6.7.5. Enabling Conduct of Intelligence Operations.

       6.7.6. Enabling Conduct of Information Operations.

       6.7.7. Challenging tactical and operational communications.

       6.7.8. Challenging air and ground tactical navigation.

       6.7.9. Fostering common situational awareness.

       6.7.10. Enabling coordination of air/land movements (all levels of war).

       6.7.11. Fostering planning for integrated urban operations (all levels of war).

       6.7.12. Enabling conduct of search and rescue operations.

       6.7.13. Enabling resupply and casualty evacuation operations.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 4
   E1. References, continued
   E2. Definitions
   E3. Information Guidelines of Urban Training Facility Proposals
   E4. Urban Training Facility Evaluation Factors


                                                 6
                                                                               DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007j

                                             E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                          REFERENCES, continued


(e) DoD Training Transformation Strategic Plan, May 8, 20062
(f) DoD Training Transformation Implementation Plan, FY2006-FY2011, February 23, 20063
(g) U.S. Joint Forces Command “Accreditation and Certification Concept of Operations,”
    July 16, 20064
(h) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum “DoD Executive Agent for Joint Urban
    Operations,” September 17, 2002
(i) U.S. Joint Forces Command Joint Force Trainer Memorandum “Joint Urban Operations
    Training Working Group,” March 7, 20055
(j) Joint Publication 1-02, “DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,” as amended




2
  Reference (e) is available through the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness,
Office of the Director, Readiness and Training Policy and Programs, Room 1E537, 4000 Defense Pentagon,
Washington, DC 20301-4000
3
  Reference (f) is available through the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness,
Office of the Director, Readiness and Training Policy and Programs, Room 1E537, 4000 Defense Pentagon,
Washington, DC 20301-4000
4
  Reference (g) is available through the U.S. Joint Forces Command, Joint Warfighting Center, JNTC Joint
Management Office, 116 Lake View Parkway, Suffolk, VA 23535-2697
5
  Reference (i) is available through the U.S. Joint Forces Command, Joint Warfighting Center, JNTC Joint
Management Office, 116 Lake View Parkway, Suffolk, VA 23535-2697




                                                         7                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007

                                       E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                                          DEFINITIONS


E2.1. Integrated Operations. Unified policy, planning, or execution actions, of the U.S.
interagency community, in coordination with other partners, across the spectrum of operations,
to achieve unified action to advance U.S. Government goals and objectives. These partners
include:

   E2.1.1. State and local governments, departments, agencies, and tribal authorities.

   E2.1.2. Foreign governments singularly or as part of an alliance or coalition.

   E2.1.3. Global and regional intergovernmental organizations (or “IGOs”).

   E2.1.4. U.S. and foreign non-governmental organizations (or “NGOs”).

    E2.1.5. U.S. and foreign private sector individuals and for-profit companies (or “private
sector”).

E2.2. Reconstruction. Actions and activities undertaken to repair, rebuild, or replace
infrastructure or institutions for security, essential services, humanitarian needs, and governance.

E2.3. Security. See Joint Publication 1-02 (Reference (j)).

E2.4. Stability. A condition resulting from activities and actions to enhance military or civilian
capabilities to provide security, essential services, humanitarian needs, and governance before,
during, and after disasters, crises, and conflicts.

E2.5. Training. Instruction and applied exercises for acquiring and retaining skills, knowledge,
and attitudes required to complete specific tasks.

    E2.5.1. Interagency Training. Training of individuals, units, and staffs considered necessary
to execute assigned or anticipated missions in support of interagency operations.

   E2.5.2. Intergovernmental Training. Training of individuals, units, and staffs considered
necessary to execute assigned or anticipated missions in support of State and local government
operations.

    E2.5.3. Joint Training. Training, including mission rehearsals, of individuals, units, and
staffs using joint doctrine, or joint tactics, techniques, and procedures to prepare joint forces or
joint staffs to respond to strategic, operational, or tactical requirements considered necessary by
the Combatant Commanders to execute assigned or anticipated missions.




                                                  8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007

    E2.5.4. Multinational Training. Training of individuals, units, and staffs considered
necessary to execute assigned or anticipated missions in support of multinational operations,
including coalition operations.

E2.6. Transition. Activities and actions undertaken to shift authorities for security, essential
services, humanitarian needs, or governance from military to civilian institutions.

E2.7. Urban Training Facilities. Facilities constructed for the primary purpose of training in an
urban environment. They include instrumentation, communications infrastructure, and the
population needed to create a physical urban environment and capabilities to conduct training in
that environment. Facilities can be composed of buildings, subterranean infrastructure, airfields,
and representative building shells, bridges, tunnels, etc, that constitute target arrays for fixed and
rotary wing aircraft. All urban training facilities will support live training, however, based on the
training audience and their training objectives, may support virtual and constructive training as
well.

    E2.7.1. Local Urban Training Facilities (LUTFs). Support foundational, Military Service
basic skills training, interagency (local and Federal), and limited integrated training. These
facilities are capable of supporting like capabilities for other Military Services. The Military
Service designated as the urban training facility operating agency is responsible for planning,
designing, funding (except where Joint/cooperative funding can be secured), constructing,
upgrading, and scheduling use of LUTFs.

    E2.7.2. Regional Urban Training Facilities (RUTFs). Support larger Military Service
organizations, joint operations to Stability, Security, Transition, and Reconstitution Operations,
and, when practicable, interagency (local and Federal), intergovernmental, and multinational
training. The Military Service designated as the urban training facility operating agency is
responsible for planning, designing, constructing, upgrading, and scheduling use of RUTFs. A
Military Service urban training facility operating agency will have responsibility for funding
such facilities. However, because of the nature of the training conducted on RUTFs, other
funding arrangements may be necessary to address requirements beyond the urban training
facility operating agency’s normal Service requirements. In accordance with Reference (f), the
DUSD(R) as the Executive Agent for T2 through the T2 process and the UTFRG will facilitate
cost sharing and joint funding for such facilities.

       E2.7.2.1. Planning and/or designation attributes for RUTFs include:

           E2.7.2.1.1. Proximity to concentration of military forces available for training.

           E2.7.2.1.2. Established training throughput at the training location.

           E2.7.2.1.3. Existing transportation infrastructure.

           E2.7.2.1.4. Adequate maneuver area to support ground force training.

           E2.7.2.1.5. Adequate airspace to support air asset training.



                                                  9                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007

           E2.7.2.1.6. Populated by role players and infrastructure support for role players.

         E2.7.2.1.7. Instrumentation to support ground truth and after-action debriefing and/or
documentation.

           E2.7.2.1.8. Communications linkages to distributed training operations in
conjunction with the live, virtual, and constructive training environment.

       E2.7.2.2. Though not primary attributes, also consider:

           E2.7.2.2.1. Proximity to coastal and riverine areas.

           E2.7.2.2.2. A dedicated opposing force.

           E2.7.2.2.3. Integrated operations participants.

E2.8. Urban Training Facility Operating Agency. The agency designated to operate and
maintain the urban training facility, which includes planning, designing, funding (except where
Joint/cooperative funding or reimbursement can be secured) constructing, upgrading, managing,
developing and enforcing operating procedures, daily scheduling, and safety. This agency is
normally responsible to the Installation Commander, who may delegate this responsibility to a
subordinate Commander.




                                               10                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007

                                       E3. ENCLOSURE 3

                   Information Guidelines for Urban Training Facility Proposals



Proposal Title
Sponsor (Army, Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, etc.)
Location (Camp, Fort, Base,…), State, Country
Facility Name and brief description of purpose and primary training audience
New, Upgrade, Expansion,…
Live fire capability
Combined arms capability
Instrumentation
Congruent and adjacent maneuver area
Largest unit trained/supported
Nearest operational airfield/airhead
Congruent airspace, nearest air delivered impact area, and ordnance restrictions
Nearest Naval training area
Course/rotation frequency and duration
Forecasted capacity and assumptions
Anticipated inter-governmental, inter-agency utilization
Potential for joint utilization
Construction start and completion dates
Resource requirements (appropriation and amount)
Point of Contact
Source of cooperative funding/appropriation/amount
Identify other urban training facilities within reasonable ground transportation distances
Remarks




                                                11                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 1322.27, April 13, 2007

                                     E4. ENCLOSURE 4

                          Urban Training Facility Evaluation Factors

1    Who are the primary and secondary users?
2    What requirements and objectives will be supported? New or modification of existing
     capability?
3    Is the facility primarily for home station users?
4    What is the proximity to similar or same capability?
5    Have availability, accessibility, and capacity been considered in terms of alternate facilities?
     What are travel costs and time to alternate facilities? Is there an alternative (Base
     Realignment and Closure or lease)? Is there a rationale for additional capability (synergy,
     future, etc.)?
6    Is the site integrated with other training venues?
7    Has the capability been coordinated with other Military Services, agencies, and the Joint
     National Training Capability JUOTWG
8    Will the capability support Military Service specific training requirements?
9    Will this capability improve joint integration/interoperability?
10   Does the site support live-virtual-constructive training simulation integration?
11   Is the site connected to the Joint Test and Experimentation Network?
12   Will the site support live air integration (e.g., airspace, air ground coordination, ordnance
     drop)?
13   Will the site have adequate ground maneuver space?
14   Will the site support joint integrated live fire impact area(s)?
15   Will the site support amphibious, coastal, and/or riverine operations?
16   Is the site instrumented for data collection and assessment?
17   Does the site support Electronic Warfare Training?
18   Are there frequency spectrum issues?
19   Are the elements of encroachment identified and assessed (e.g., urban growth, unexploded
     ordnance, endangered species and critical habitat, cultural resources, maritime sustainability,
     air quality, clean water, wetlands, airborne noise)?
20   Can the site be used for joint operational tests and evaluations?
21   Does the site have or support observer-controllers, opposing forces, and population
     representation?
22   Is the site scalable and adaptable for future training requirements?
23   Is there sufficient infrastructure to support the training units?
24   What is the forecasted annual training capacity in training days (e.g., 10, 20, 25)?
25   What is the forecasted annual throughput and/or utilization in training days (e.g., 10, 20, 25)?
26   List planning assumptions used to determine the training capacity, throughput, and/or
     utilization.
27   Remarks.




                                               12                                ENCLOSURE 4
