                              Department of Defense

                               DIRECTIVE
                                                                         NUMBER 1200.16
                                                                           March 20, 2004



                                                                                    ASD(RA)

SUBJECT: Contracted Civilian-Acquired Training (CCAT) for Reserve Components

References: (a) DoD Directive 1200.16, "Contracted Civilian-Acquired Training
                (CCAT) for Reserve Components," May 30, 1990 (hereby canceled)
            (b) Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR), current edition
            (c) Defense FAR Supplement (DFARS), current edition
            (d) DoD Directive 4100.15, "Commercial Activities Program," March 10,
                1989


1. PURPOSE

This Directive:

     1.1. Reissues reference (a).

     1.2. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures and
guidance under references (b) through (d) for Contracted Civilian-Acquired Training
(CCAT) for Reserve components of the Armed Forces. This policy is intended to assist
all Reserve components, and by agreement with the Department of Homeland Security,
the Coast Guard Reserve, in developing, conducting, evaluating, contracting, funding,
reporting, and selecting training by contracting with sources outside the Department of
Defense.

      1.3. Does not preclude the practice of obtaining approved military occupation
training for individual Reserve component personnel from civilian institutions either at
direct expense of the Service member or with Government-assisted tuition. (The purpose
of CCAT is to increase the number of mission-qualified individuals in the Reserve
components, thereby improving overall readiness. When appropriately justified, CCAT
is an alternative to formal military school training and must be directly related to specific
individual mobilization skill requirements or billet assignment.)
                                                            DODD 1200.16, March 20, 2004


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Services and
by agreement with the Department of Homeland Security, the U.S. Coast Guard, and the
Coast Guard Reserve, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant
Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the
Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the
Department of Defense (hereafter referred to as the "DoD Components.") The term
"Military Services," as used above, refers to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the
Marine Corps and their Reserve components.


3. DEFINITIONS

    3.1. Civilian Institutions. Accredited universities, colleges, community technical
schools, junior colleges, and any other recognized training institutions.

     3.2. Contracted Civilian-Acquired Training. All training obtained by contract with
sources outside the Department of Defense for use by the DoD Components.

    3.3. Reserve Components. The Army National Guard, Army Reserve, Naval
Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, Air National Guard, Air Force Reserve, and Coast
Guard Reserve.


4. POLICY

      4.1. Contract training is authorized when it is demonstrated that such training
fulfills all military requirements, is less costly, and any of the following conditions exist:

          4.1.1. The subject matter is not presented in the Military Service school system
or requires extensive residence that precludes Reservists from attendance due to civilian
employment considerations, or is a low density specialty not economical to export.

           4.1.2. Military Service school quotas have been requested, but are not available
to satisfy an identified training requirement specified by the Military Service concerned.

         4.1.3. Residential instruction in Military Service schools is more costly,
because of travel costs, than contracting.

     4.2. All DoD Components shall comply with existing laws and regulations on
contracting from non-DoD sources.

     4.3. Negative effects of CCAT on the mobilization training base shall be considered
before contracts are awarded.


                                              2
                                                         DODD 1200.16, March 20, 2004


      4.4. The Military Services shall evaluate and approve all programs of instruction
before contracting for training. Courses shall be devoted to teaching those skills needed
for members to obtain required proficiency levels for a particular occupational specialty
or to meet performance standards. Each course must provide an end-of-class student
performance evaluation or test to verify attainment of training objectives.

     4.5. Civilian institutions and industries used for contract training shall be fully
accredited and approved as indicated by their inclusion in the list of "Nationally
Recognized Accrediting Agencies and Associations" published by the U.S. Secretary of
Education.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    5.1. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs (ASD(RA)) shall, after
coordination with the Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and
Readiness), approve and provide guidance on all matters involving contracted civilian-
acquired training for the Reserve components.

      5.2. The Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and Readiness)
shall coordinate with the ASD(RA) on all issues related to contracted civilian-acquired
training for the Reserve components.

     5.3. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

           5.3.1. Ensure the adequate analysis of system requirements, development of
training requirements, and research of existing Military Service or prior CCAT programs
before contracting for training.

         5.3.2. Ensure that the CCAT program is conducted and evaluated in
accordance with this Directive.




                                            3
                                               DODD 1200.16, March 20, 2004


6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 1
  E1. Guidance




                                           4
                                                           DODD 1200.16, March 20, 2004


                                   E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                        GUIDANCE

     E1.1.1. The following guidance is to be observed in contracting for training
obtained from non-DoD sources:

          E1.1.1.1. Contracts shall be awarded and administered in accordance with the
FAR and DFARS (references (b) and (c)). Negotiating the contract is the responsibility
of the contracting officer from the DoD Component.

          E1.1.1.2. Funding shall be controlled. Obligation of funds shall be in
accordance with existing regulations that implement reference (d). Total costs shall be
based on tuition, supplies, and activity and/or registration fees. Student accident liability
insurance shall be provided by the civilian instructional institution to cover injuries
incurred due to negligence and accidents occurring through no fault of the student. The
amount of benefit provisions should be in accordance with regulatory guidelines of the
Department of Labor, the Department of State and local government agencies.

          E1.1.1.3. Records of CCAT shall be maintained to include cost per student per
hour, name of institution, and number of students trained per fiscal year. The Military
Services shall determine the format of these and other reporting requirements.




                                              5                             ENCLOSURE 1
