                            DOD INSTRUCTION 4151.18
              DOD MAINTENANCE OF MILITARY MATERIEL

Originating Component:      Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment

Effective:                  August 30, 2024

Releasability:              Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division Website
                            at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Reissues and Cancels:       DoD Directive 4151.18, “Maintenance of Military Materiel,” March 31,
                            2004

Approved by:                William A. LaPlante, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and
                            Sustainment


Purpose: In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5135.02, this issuance reissues
the 2004 directive as a DoD instruction (DoDI) that establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and
provides procedures for the performance of DoD materiel maintenance across the entire life cycle,
including maintenance of weapon systems, hardware, equipment, software, and data, or any combination
thereof for both organic and contract sources of repair (referred to collectively in this issuance as
“maintenance capabilities”).
                                                                                                 DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Policy. ............................................................................................................................... 3
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES ......................................................................................................... 4
   2.1. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Sustainment (ASD(S)). ............................................. 4
   2.2. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Materiel Readiness (DASD(MR)). ............... 4
   2.3. DoD Component Heads. ................................................................................................... 4
SECTION 3: MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS AND CAPABILITIES ............................................................ 7
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 10
   G.1. Acronyms. ...................................................................................................................... 10
   G.2. Definitions...................................................................................................................... 10
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 14




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                                    DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY.

This issuance applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector General of
the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this issuance as “DoD
Components”).


1.2. POLICY.

It is DoD policy that:

    a. The structure and resourcing of weapon system maintenance capabilities and programs
will be both effective and efficient for meeting readiness objectives of national defense strategic
and contingency requirements.

    b. Weapon system maintenance programs will be planned, developed, managed, and
documented concurrently with capability design, in accordance with DoDI 5000.88, to provide
the best integrated product support outcomes at lowest cost.

   c. Life cycle sustainment plans will include DoD maintenance plans pursuant to
Sections 4251, 4252, 4323, and 4324 of Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) that identify and
provide standards for the regular review of:

       (1) Maintenance capabilities that restore materiel safety, reliability, and availability to
required levels when deterioration has occurred.

       (2) Depot maintenance core logistics capability requirements to directly support strategic
and contingency plans as early as possible in the program life cycle.

   d. DoD maintenance operations planning will minimize or prevent environmental, safety,
and occupational health hazards.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                               3
                                                                  DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


                           SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SUSTAINMENT (ASD(S)).

Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and
Sustainment, the ASD(S):

   a. Oversees implementation of policies and procedures for materiel readiness, including
maintenance support of weapon systems and military equipment.

   b. Oversees maintenance policy and management for all weapon systems and military
equipment maintenance programs and related resources within the DoD.

    c. Monitors the overall effectiveness and efficiency of DoD maintenance and materiel
readiness systems and continually advocates for actions to improve readiness.

    d. Oversees and approves the development, coordination, publication, and upkeep of
technical procedures for maintenance of military equipment and materiel readiness.


2.2. DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MATERIEL READINESS
(DASD(MR)).

Under the authority, direction, and control of the ASD(S), the DASD(MR):

    a. Advises, supervises, and develops policy for all DoD sustainment elements that relate to
military maintenance requirements, capabilities, workloads, and materiel readiness.

   b. Develops policy to utilize, maintain, and assess the organic industrial base for
maintenance capabilities critical to national security.

    c. Advises the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment and the ASD(S)
on all aspects of acquisition and sustainment relating to core logistics capabilities pursuant to
Section 2464 of Title 10, U.S.C.

   d. Manages periodic congressional reporting requirements, to include Sections 482, 2464,
2466, and 2476 of Title 10, U.S.C.


2.3. DOD COMPONENT HEADS.

DoD Component heads:

    a. Establish policy and implementation guidance that relates to military maintenance
requirements, capabilities, workloads, and materiel readiness in accordance with this issuance for
all Component elements.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       4
                                                                  DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


   b. Adopt business practices and quality management programs and processes to
continuously improve maintenance operations and production and to optimize cost savings and
avoidance.

   c. Direct Component compliance with depot maintenance expenditure limitations pursuant to
Section 2466 of Title 10, U.S.C.

   d. Comply with reporting requirements by:

       (1) Providing data requested by the DASD(MR).

        (2) Generating the information needed to congressional reporting requirements pursuant
to Sections 482, 2464, 2466, and 2476 of Title 10, U.S.C.

       (3) Maintaining operations security with data and reports indicating readiness or system
vulnerabilities impacting, or potentially impacting, mission success and protecting against those
vulnerabilities appropriately.

   e. Minimize unutilized and underutilized plant capacity. Report depot maintenance capacity
and utilization in accordance with DoD 4151.18-H.

   f. Serve as decision authority for maintenance related requirements within acquisition
programs.

       (1) Verify that core logistics determinations occur for all acquisition programs and are
reported pursuant to Section 4251 of Title 10, U.S.C.

       (2) Oversee that:

           (a) An estimate of the requirements for core logistics capabilities and associated
sustaining workloads is made pursuant to Section 4252 of Title 10, U.S.C.

            (b) Organic depot maintenance for inherently governmental and core logistics
capability requirements is provided.

            (c) Investments are made for organic depot maintenance capability and capacity to
establish and support all depot source of repair (DSOR) decisions.

            (d) The capabilities to support depot maintenance core requirements are established
no later than 4 years after initial operational capability.

    g. Supervise all aspects of the program life cycle related to maintenance of military materiel
including logistics, maintenance, and materiel readiness.

    h. Establish DSOR assignments for weapon systems that require depot maintenance.
Incorporate DSOR results into the program Life Cycle Sustainment Plan and reflect assignments
in product support strategies and plans in accordance with DoDI 4151.24.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                         5
                                                                   DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


   i. Establish policies that require all cannibalizations to be authorized, managed, and
documented.

    j. Create reporting procedures for weapon systems that are not mission capable for extended
periods.

   k. Document data collection and submission processes pursuant to reporting requirements
contained within:

       (1) Section 117 of Title 10, U.S.C.

       (2) DoDD 7730.65.

       (3) DoDI 3110.05.

   l. Develop and implement programs for the effective storage and reclamation of materiel
withdrawn from operational use on a temporary or long-term basis. Structure programs to
reduce maintenance requirements while preserving materiel capability. Require salvage and
demilitarization operations to comply with environmental and industrial safety standards.

    m. Designate organic depot level maintenance activities as a center of industrial and
technical excellence pursuant to Section 2474 of Title 10, U.S.C.

    n. Review field level and depot level maintenance workloads every 5 years after initial
operational capability to improve materiel availability and reliability, increase operational
availability rates, and reduce operation and sustainment costs pursuant to Section 4323 of Title
10, U.S.C.

        (1) Identify opportunities for consolidation, regionalization, public-private partnerships,
or other types of integrated support arrangements that will yield significant economies of
operation while sustaining or improving responsiveness.

      (2) Document the results from Paragraph 2.3.n. in statutory periodic 5-year sustainment
reviews, product support business case analyses, and updated life cycle sustainment plans
pursuant to Sections 4323 and 4324 of Title 10, U.S.C. and in accordance with DoDI 5000.91.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                           6
                                                                    DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


       SECTION 3: MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS AND CAPABILITIES
Managers of maintenance programs and capabilities will:

   a. Maximize effectiveness and efficiency to make the best possible use of available DoD and
industry resources at the system, subsystem, and component levels.

    b. Employ the full range of maintenance support structures as applicable, including adaptive
techniques such as organic or unique military capabilities, performance-based product support
arrangements, commercial sector support, partnering, and competition.

   c. Minimize requirements for all support equipment pursuant to DoDI 5000.91. When use of
support equipment may not be eliminated, standardize support equipment design for the broadest
possible range of applications, consistent with maintenance concepts.

   d. Minimize the total life cycle cost of ownership and optimize the footprint of maintenance
capabilities employed in an area of operation.

   e. Establish inter-Service depot maintenance agreements to execute associated inter-Service
maintenance capabilities in accordance with DoDIs 4151.26 and 4000.19.

    f. Develop technical data and intellectual property strategies for sustainment before issuance
of a contract solicitation for the weapon system, subsystem, or components in accordance with
DoDI 5010.44.

        (1) Evaluate long-term technical data needs of systems, subsystems, and components,
and establish intellectual property management plans that provide technical data rights needed to
sustain them over the entire life cycle.

         (2) Include priced contract options for future delivery of technical data not acquired at
initial contract award in the solicitation.

   g. Develop maintenance plans within the life cycle sustainment plans that provide the best
possible product support outcomes at the lowest operation and support cost for both covered and
non-covered systems.

    h. Manage and structure maintenance capabilities and programs to achieve inherent
reliability, availability, safety, and maintainability levels for meeting readiness objectives of
national defense strategic and contingency requirements.

    i. Address failure modes and effects using reliability centered maintenance analysis and
allocate tasks to appropriate levels of maintenance (i.e., field and depot). Maintenance
capabilities programs must utilize condition-based maintenance plus (CBM+) as a proactive
maintenance strategy for achieving cost effective weapon system sustainment in accordance with
DoDI 4151.22 and DoD Manual 4151.25 in embedded and off-equipment applications.




SECTION 3: MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS AND CAPABILITIES                                                     7
                                                                   DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


    j. Invest in the development of new technologies to improve the reliability, availability,
safety, and maintainability of DoD maintenance capabilities, including the cost, schedule
effectiveness, and quality of maintenance tasks and processes.

    k. Include comprehensive corrosion prevention and control programs that maximize system
availability at the lowest life cycle cost. Maintenance reporting systems must enable collection
of corrosion related preventive and corrective maintenance actions with sufficient reliability to
be used to address corrosion prevention, control design, logistics considerations, and readiness
issues.

   l. Identify core logistics capability requirements and the workload to sustain those
capabilities pursuant to Section 2464 of Title 10, U.S.C. and in accordance with DoDI 4151.20.

      (1) Core logistics capabilities are fulfilled by establishing government-owned and
government-operated repair capabilities to provide a ready and controlled source of technical
competence including government personnel, equipment, and facilities.

       (2) Capabilities are resourced and work loaded in peacetime, while preserving the surge
capabilities necessary to support effective and timely responses to a mobilization, national
defense contingency situations, and other emergency requirements.

   m. Direct that workloads required to maintain core depot maintenance capabilities are not
subject to cost studies in accordance with Office of Management and Budget Circular A-76 and
document the justification for that direction.

    n. Employ merit-based selection procedures to select depot maintenance source of repair
assignments in accordance with DoDI 4151.24.

       (1) Apply risk mitigation analysis and consider competitive factors such as cost,
performance, and responsiveness to establish the best value to the government when choosing
sources of repair for depot maintenance workloads that are above core and non-core logistics
capabilities sustaining workloads.

       (2) Consider opportunities to combine similar requirements when assigning workloads at
the organic, contract, inter-Service sources of repair, or combinations thereof.

    o. Require performance of an organic DoD depot level maintenance workload with a value
of at least $3 million not to be changed to performance by a contractor or another DoD organic
activity unless the change is made using:

      (1) Merit-based selection procedures for competitions among all organic depot level
DoD activities; or

       (2) Competitive procedures for competitions among private and public sector entities
pursuant to Section 2469 of Title 10, U.S.C.

    p. Equip DoD materiel with automated identification technology to allow paperless
identification, minimize data entry requirements, and ease digital storage and retrieval of


SECTION 3: MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS AND CAPABILITIES                                                    8
                                                                  DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


essential information and maintenance history. Employ serialized item management techniques
to manage select items throughout their life cycle.

   q. Support use of effective management information at all levels that include financial,
scheduling, production control, and quality of maintenance.

       (1) DoD maintenance activities must be supported by meaningful financial management
information such as determining the costs of ownership, costs of alternate sources of repair, and
make-or-buy decisions. Job order cost accounting must be used for all depot maintenance
operations and used for other maintenance, as appropriate.

        (2) DoD depot maintenance activities must follow the cost accounting requirements
identified in Volume 11B of DoD 7000.14-R, regardless of the funding source.

       (3) DoD Components must report depot maintenance cost and production information
regardless of the source of funding or the activity accomplishing the work as required by Volume
6A of DoD 7000.14-R. This includes all depot maintenance that is contractor provided,
performed under contractor logistics support agreements, and provided through partnership
arrangements.

    r. Collect and analyze maintenance related reliability, availability, safety, and
maintainability data and leverage common data standards and transmission across weapon
systems. The maintenance programs must:

       (1) Include sufficient analytic capability for identifying necessary adjustments based on:

            (a) Operating experience, materiel condition, and requirements for reliability,
availability, safety, and maintainability modifications.

           (b) Changes to training curricula or delivery methods.

       (2) Establish and evaluate performance metrics that promote continuous improvement in
maintenance, ensuring responsiveness and best value to operating forces.

   s. Recognize outstanding achievements in military equipment and weapon system
maintenance by maintenance organizations of DoD Components through the Secretary of
Defense Maintenance Awards Program in accordance with DoDI 1348.30.




SECTION 3: MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS AND CAPABILITIES                                                9
                                                                   DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


                                          GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

 ACRONYM                   MEANING

 ASD(S)                    Assistant Secretary of Defense for Sustainment

 CBM+                      condition-based maintenance plus

 DASD(MR)                  Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Materiel Readiness
 DoDD                      DoD directive
 DoDI                      DoD instruction
 DSOR                      depot source of repair

 U.S.C.                    United States Code


G.2. DEFINITIONS.

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

 TERM                      DEFINITION

 automated                 A suite of technologies that automatically captures data, thereby
 identification            enhancing the ability to identify, track, document, and control assets
 technology                (e.g., materiel) and deploying forces, equipment, personnel, and
                           sustainment cargo. It includes a variety of data storage or carrier
                           technologies, such as linear bar codes, two-dimensional symbols,
                           magnetic strips, integrated circuit cards, optical laser discs, or
                           satellite tracking transponders and radio frequency transponders.

 cannibalization           The taking of an assembly, subassembly, component, or part from a
                           serviceable or unserviceable item that has not been inducted for
                           maintenance, without regard to its location or ownership, by a
                           maintenance activity for use on an item that has been inducted for
                           maintenance.

 capacity                  The projected amount of output that a product shop or activity can
                           produce in the product mix that it is designed to accommodate.




GLOSSARY                                                                                            10
                                                               DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


TERM                   DEFINITION

CBM+                   A DoD initiative focused on the development and implementation of
                       data analysis and sustainment technology capabilities to improve
                       weapon system availability and achieve optimum costs across the
                       enterprise. CBM+ is the application and integration of processes,
                       technologies, and knowledge-based capabilities to improve reliability
                       and maintenance effectiveness of DoD systems and components.
                       CBM+ diminishes life-cycle costs by reducing unscheduled
                       maintenance and enabling predictive maintenance. CBM+ is
                       maintenance performed based on evidence of need.

center of industrial   A designation that recognizes an activity or facility for its core
and technical          competencies. This designation allows the activity or facility to re-
excellence             engineer industrial processes and enables the best use of public and
                       private sector capabilities.

core logistics         The depot maintenance capability including personnel, equipment,
capability             and facilities maintained by the DoD at government-owned and
requirements           government-operated facilities as the ready and controlled source of
                       technical competence and resources necessary to provide effective
                       and timely response to a mobilization, national defense contingency
                       situations, and other emergency requirements.

core logistics         Depot level maintenance and repair work necessary to provide
sustaining workload    technical competence in peacetime while preserving the surge
                       capacity and reconstitution capabilities necessary to fully support
                       DoD strategic and contingency requirements.

corrosion              The deterioration of a material or its properties due to a reaction of
                       that material with its chemical environment.

depot maintenance      The processes of materiel maintenance or repair involving the
                       overhaul, upgrading, rebuilding, testing, inspection, and reclamation
                       (as necessary) of weapon systems, equipment end items, parts,
                       components, assemblies, and subassemblies.

                       Depot maintenance also includes all aspects of software maintenance;
                       installation of parts or components for modifications; and technical
                       assistance to operational units, intermediate maintenance
                       organizations, and other activities.




GLOSSARY                                                                                        11
                                                                 DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


TERM                    DEFINITION

field level             Maintenance intended to return systems rapidly to users in a ready
maintenance             status. It encompasses the organizational and on-system maintenance
                        and repairs necessary for day-to-day operations, as well as the
                        intermediate, off-system repair of components and end items for
                        weapon systems and supply chains.

                        Field level maintenance is less complex than depot level maintenance
                        and serves as the link between strategic capabilities and tactical
                        requirements.

inherent availability   Availability of a system with respect only to operating time and
                        corrective maintenance.

inherent reliability    The level of reliability that is established by the design and
                        manufacturing process of a weapon system or equipment.

initial operational     The first attainment of the capability to effectively employ a weapon,
capability              item of equipment, or system of approved specific characteristics that
                        is manned or operated by an adequately trained, equipped, and
                        supported military unit or force.

job order cost          An accounting method that accumulates costs for individual items or
accounting              lots. A job may be a service, such as the repair of equipment, or a
                        manufactured item.

maintenance             Includes but is not limited to overhaul, rework, rebuild, progressive
capabilities            maintenance, preventive servicing, recondition, phased incremental
                        maintenance, conversion, activation, analytical inspection, repair,
                        inactivation, renovation, modification, inspection, manufacture,
                        reclamation, storage, technical assistance, software maintenance,
                        calibration, contracted logistics support, interim contract support,
                        performance-based product support, and similar contracts.

maintenance             The overall maintenance planning and management development
program                 process that defines the repair and upkeep tasks, schedule, and
                        resources required to sustain a weapons system with the focus on
                        defining the actions and support necessary to attain the system’s
                        operational availability objective.

make-or-buy             A decision to determine whether a product should be manufactured
decision                in-house or purchased from an external supplier.




GLOSSARY                                                                                        12
                                                           DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


TERM                 DEFINITION

performance-based    Product support acquired through performance-based arrangements
product support      that deliver warfighter requirements and incentivize providers to
                     reduce costs through innovation. These arrangements are contracts
                     with industry or inter-governmental agreements. Sources of support
                     may be organic, commercial, or a combination with a focus on
                     optimizing customer support, availability, and reduced ownership
                     costs.

product support      The package of support functions required to field and maintain the
                     readiness and operational capability of systems, subsystems, and
                     components, including all functions related to system readiness.

program life cycle   The relationship between the acquisition phases and work efforts and
                     key program events such as decision points and reviews. The life
                     cycle process takes the program through research, development,
                     production, deployment, operations, support, upgrade, and
                     demilitarization and disposal.

serialized item      Programs and techniques that use life cycle item management data to
management           track the performance of uniquely identified items throughout their
                     life cycle. The overarching goal of these programs and techniques is
                     to enable managers to achieve optimum weapon system materiel
                     availability at the best total ownership cost using effective and
                     efficient life cycle management practices.

sustainment review   An assessment of the product support strategy, performance, and
                     operating and support costs of a covered system in accordance with
                     Section 4323 of Title 10, U.S.C.

utilization          A measure of the actual output that a product shop or activity
                     produces in the product mix that it is designed to accommodate.




GLOSSARY                                                                                   13
                                                              DoDI 4151.18, August 30, 2024


                                     REFERENCES
DoD 4151.18-H, “Depot Maintenance Capacity and Utilization Measurement Handbook,”
   March 10, 2007, as amended
DoD 7000.14-R, Volume 6A, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation
   (FMR): Reporting Policy,” July 2020
DoD 7000.14-R, Volume 11B, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation
   (FMR): Reimbursable Operations Policy – Working Capital Funds (WCF),” April 2022
DoD Directive 5135.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
   (USD(A&S)),” July 15, 2020
DoD Directive 7730.65, “DoD Readiness Reporting System,” May 31, 2023
DoD Instruction 1348.30, “Secretary of Defense Maintenance Awards,” April 8, 2019
DoD Instruction 3110.05, “Sustainment Health Metrics in Support of Materiel Availability,”
   April 24, 2024
DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” December 16, 2020
DoD Instruction 4151.20, “Depot Maintenance Core Capabilities Determination Process,”
   May 4, 2018, as amended
DoD Instruction 4151.22, “Condition-Based Maintenance Plus for Materiel Maintenance,”
   August 14, 2020
DoD Instruction 4151.24, “Depot Source of Repair Assignment Determination Process,”
   November 7, 2023
DoD Instruction 4151.26, “DoD Inter-Service Depot Maintenance,” October 31, 2022
DoD Instruction 5000.88, “Engineering of Defense Systems,” November 18, 2020
DoD Instruction 5000.91, “Product Support Management for the Adaptive Acquisition
   Framework,” November 4, 2021
DoD Instruction 5010.44, “Intellectual Property (IP) Acquisition and Licensing,” October 16,
   2019
DoD Manual 4151.25, “Reliability Centered Maintenance (RCM),” August 31, 2018, as
   amended
Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-76, “Performance of Commercial Activities,”
   August 4, 1983, as amended
United States Code, Title 10




REFERENCES                                                                                14
