                  -0                      Department of Defense
                                           INSTRUCTION
                                                                                    NUMBER 1400.36
                                                                                           June 2, 2008
                                                      Incorporating Change 1, Effective October 5, 2020

                                                                                            USD(I&S)

SUBJECT: DoD Implementation of the Joint Intelligence Community Duty Assignment (JDA)
         Program

References: (a) DoD Directive 1400.36, “Intelligence Community Officer (ICO) Programs,”
                March 5, 2002 (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and
                Security (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
            (c) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as
                amended
            (d) Intelligence Community Directive Number 601, “Human Capital Joint
                Intelligence Community Duty Assignments,” May 16, 2006 1
            (e) through (g), see Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction:

   1.1. Reissues Reference (a) as a DoD Instruction under the authority in Reference (b) and the
guidance in Reference (c) and renames it “DoD Implementation of the Joint Intelligence
Community Duty Assignment (JDA) Program.”

   1.2. Establishes DoD policy for the implementation of the Director of National Intelligence
(DNI) Joint Intelligence Community (IC) Duty Assignment Program (Reference (d)) within the
Department of Defense.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

   2.1. This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments (including the Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a service in the
Department of Homeland Security by agreement with that Department), the Office of the

1
    http://www.dni.gov/electronic_reading_room/electronic_reading_room.htm.
                                                                       DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008


Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office
of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred
to collectively as the “DoD Components”).

    2.2. The JDA Program is a DNI leadership development program consisting of two
components. First, the temporary detail or permanent appointment of employees to JDA
positions that provide substantive professional, technical, or leadership experience in more than
one IC element, department, or organization. Second, the Joint Leadership Development
Program (JLDP), a training program designed to develop the workforce who will lead with a
community perspective and strategic outlook. Completion of both components of the JDA
Program will result in JDA Program certification. However, completion of the JLDP is waived
until such time as the JLDP is established and implemented.

    2.3. The JDA program is implemented within DoD by this Instruction. The Under Secretary
of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)) will work cooperatively with the Director
of National Intelligence to facilitate synchronization and integration of the JDA program with
personnel programs within the Defense Intelligence Components. The JDA program includes all
personnel covered in the Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel System (DCIPS) unless
excluded as provided for in this Instruction. All requests for detailees external to the Department
to perform duties in the fields of intelligence, counterintelligence, or security not covered by this
Instruction shall be processed in accordance with procedures outlined in DoD Directive 1000.17
(Reference (e)).

    2.4. JDA positions shall be limited to those classified at General Grade (GG) 13 and above
(or equivalent).

   2.5. This Instruction does not apply to the Active and Reserve members of the Military
Departments.


3. DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this Instruction are defined at Enclosure 2.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:

    4.1. The DoD implementation of the JDA Program shall provide DCIPS employees with
increased experience and understanding of IC missions and functions.

   4.2. JDA Program certification shall be a requirement for all DCIPS positions classified
above GG-15, or equivalent.




Change 1, 10/05/2020                              2
                                                                      DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008



5. RESPONSIBILITIES

   5.1. The USD(I&S), in accordance with Reference (d) and the Memorandum of Agreement
between the Secretary of Defense and DNI (Reference (f)), shall:

      5.1.1. Oversee the implementation, management, and execution of JDA Program for the
Defense Intelligence Components.

       5.1.2. Approve the designation of internal positions that provide JDA experience.

       5.1.3. Approve requests for JDA Program certification exemptions.

       5.1.4. Approve requests for JDA Program certification waivers.

      5.1.5. Task, review, and analyze metrics from DoD implementation of the JDA
Program, as needed.

       5.1.6. Respond to DNI JDA Program reporting requirements on behalf of the Department
of Defense.

        5.1.7. Maintain copies of the JDA Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) for DoD
personnel going on a JDA rotational assignment. Copies are available at:
https://usdi.dtic.mil/usdi_docs/keyref/dcs/reldocs/2008/JD_MOA_26-Sept-07_03202008.pdf.

   5.2. The Heads of the Defense Intelligence Components shall:

       5.2.1. Meet appropriate JDA Program timelines as set by the USD(I&S).

       5.2.2. Issue internal operating policy, as necessary.

        5.2.3. Incorporate JDA Program requirements into component civilian personnel
regulations, training and development programs, and Military Intelligence Program or National
Intelligence Program submissions covering DCIPS personnel and positions, consistent with this
Instruction.

       5.2.4. Promote and encourage participation of eligible personnel in the JDA Program.

        5.2.5. Provide to USD(I&S) a list of permanent and rotational internal positions by title,
organization, and duty location that are recommended as designated JDA positions. Certain
positions below the senior level may also be recommended.

       5.2.6. Notify the USD(I&S), in writing, when a JDA-designated position is canceled or
substantially modified so that the inventory of positions can be updated.




Change 1, 10/05/2020                             3
                                                                     DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008


     5.2.7. Provide, in writing, requests for waiver or exemption of JDA requirements to the
USD(I&S) for review and adjudication.

        5.2.8. Respond to USD(I&S) JDA Program data calls. Reports requested by the Office
of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) shall be sent through the Office of the
USD(I&S) (OUSD(I&S)).

      5.2.9. Maintain and update Component-specific data in the ODNI JDA Program
Database.

        5.2.10. Provide a copy of the employee-signed JDA MOA to USD(I&S) within 30 days
of the release of the employee to a JDA.

     5.2.11. Designate a representative to coordinate JDA actions and participate on
USD(I&S) and DNI sponsored committees or working groups.

       5.2.12. Adjudicate employee claims for JDA credit.

       5.2.13. Certify employees upon completion of JDA and JLDP.

       5.2.14. Post all available Component JDA opportunities on the ODNI Joint IC Duty
Web site.


6. PROCEDURES

   6.1. Criteria for JDA Credit

       6.1.1. A full-time employee may receive credit for JDA in one of the following ways:

            6.1.1.1. Completing a temporary, rotational JDA of between 12 and 36 months in a
position at or above the GG-13 level or equivalent in another IC element, or an organization
outside the IC with a “successful” rating or higher.

               6.1.1.1.1. Be approved by the employee’s first-level supervisor and second-level
manager.

               6.1.1.1.2. Have duties and responsibilities requiring that employee to acquire and
apply substantial practical knowledge and understanding of the organization to which assigned,
including its mission, structure, key personnel, and culture.

             6.1.1.1.3 Be part of, and consistent with, that employee’s individual career
development plan(s), as discussed with and approved by the employee’s first-level supervisor.

               6.1.1.1.4. Meet competency requirements and career path(s) recommended by the
individual’s professional community.



Change 1, 10/05/2020                            4
                                                                      DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008


           6.1.1.2. Serving at least 12 months in a position that has been specifically designated
as providing JDA credit within the employee’s own element.

            6.1.1.3. Serving at least 12 months in another IC agency or element in a permanent
position classified at a pay grade or rank of at least GG-13 or its equivalent.

        6.1.2. Part-time employees may receive JDA credit if assigned to a designated JDA
position and complete the equivalent of at least 12 months of full-time work.

        6.1.3. In addition to departmental assignments, employees may receive JDA credit for
comparable permanent or temporary assignments to organizations that include other inter-
governmental, private sector, non-governmental, academic or educational, foreign national, or
international organizations (e.g., the North Atlantic Treaty Organization) if the assignment meets
the requirements of this Instruction.

        6.1.4. The Head of a Defense Intelligence Component may request that USD(I&S)
designate an internal position or assignment as providing joint experience. This may include
certain liaison and equivalent positions (to include full-time, extended service on a multi-agency
or joint task force or project team) that may provide employees with sufficient interagency
experience to qualify as the equivalent of a JDA outside of that agency or element.

            6.1.4.1. To qualify as a JDA equivalent, an internal assignment must involve
significant policy, program, managerial, operational, liaison, tasking, or coordinating
responsibility for resources, programs, policies, or operations that are carried out by the
employee’s agency or element, in conjunction with one or more other IC elements or
organizations external to the IC. The assigned employee is required to acquire and apply
extensive, first-hand knowledge and understanding of one or more other IC agencies, IC
elements, or organizations external to the IC, to include:

               6.1.4.1.1. Combatant Commands and Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities

               6.1.4.1.2. Other Federal agencies

               6.1.4.1.3. State, local, or tribal governments

               6.1.4.1.4. Joint terrorism task forces

               6.1.4.1.5. Foreign partners

               6.1.4.1.6. International organizations

            6.1.4.2. To qualify for JDA credit, an internal assignment shall meet the JDA criteria
outlined in 6.1.

       6.1.5. Deployment to a designated combat zone for 179 days or more on permanent
change of station, temporary change of station, or temporary duty orders is deemed to satisfy the
12-month minimum requirement for JDA credit.


Change 1, 10/05/2020                             5
                                                                          DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008



       6.1.6. Multiple assignments of 90 consecutive days or more shall be cumulatively
applied to satisfy the 12-month minimum requirement for JDA credit, so long as that minimum
requirement is met within a 24-month period. Multiple assignments of 90 consecutive days or
more in a designated combat zone shall also be cumulatively applied to meet the 179-day
minimum requirement for JDA credit, provided that minimum requirement is met within a
24-month period.

    6.2. Claims for JDA Credit. The Defense Intelligence Components shall determine whether
an employee’s relevant military, professional, technical, managerial, and/or leadership
experience outside the IC qualifies as the equivalent of a JDA. An employee may file a JDA
credit claim for a permanent or temporary rotational assignment after completing 12 months in a
JDA or within 60 days of completion of the JDA. JDA credit shall be recorded in the
employee’s official personnel records using a standard set of data elements, standards, and/or
definitions to be issued by the ODNI.

       6.2.1. An employee may receive JDA credit for a completed IC Assignments Program
(ICAP) rotational assignment as long as it meets the JDA criteria and was completed on or after
January 1, 1997, when the ICAP was established. Claims for an ICAP assignment shall be
submitted in accordance with that agency’s or element’s internal policies and procedures.

        6.2.2. Employees may claim that one or more previous permanent or temporary
assignments within the IC, or to an organization external to the IC, should be credited as
providing qualifying JDA experience. To qualify for JDA credit, the assignment shall have been
completed after September 11, 2001; meet the JDA criteria; and be officially documented by a
notice of personnel action, formal MOA, or other official documentation.

        6.2.3. As a rare exception to the time limitations cited in subparagraphs 6.2.1. and 6.2.2.,
an employee may request that a temporary or permanent assignment to another IC agency or
element completed on or before September 11, 2001, but begun on or after January 1, 1997,
qualifies as providing JDA credit. To be credited, the Head of a Defense Intelligence
Component or senior designee must determine that the assignment clearly and directly
contributed to a joint (that is, inter- or multi-agency) function, activity, or operation critical to the
overall IC and its national security mission, meets the JDA criteria established in this Instruction,
and is officially recorded by a notice of personnel action, formal MOA, or other official
documentation. Copies of claims approved under this exception shall be provided to USD(I&S).

       6.2.4. Each claim shall be submitted on a standard form issued by the ODNI and
available on the ODNI Joint IC Duty Web site. Copies are available to authorized users via the
Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System at http://icjointduty.ic.gov. A DoD
Component may establish an alternative or supplementary process for identifying and
determining whether an employee’s previous permanent or rotational assignment(s) may qualify
for JDA credit (for example, by searching assignment records in its human resource management
information system).




Change 1, 10/05/2020                               6
                                                                      DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008


       6.2.5 Filing timelines shall be published under separate cover. Employees shall submit
completed claim forms in accordance with the internal policies and procedures of their
employing element. Each DoD Component shall review and adjudicate each claim, in
accordance with general guidelines issued by the ODNI, and issue a written decision to the
employee.

    6.3. Intelligence Community Officer Program (ICOP) Transition. The ICOP, consisting of
the ICAP, the Organization Career Development Program (OCDP), and IC Officer Training
(ICOT), is replaced with the JDA Program. Those employees who earned IC Officer
certification through the ICOP shall be awarded JDA Program certification.

         6.3.1. Employees who have completed or are on an ICAP detail shall have the
assignment reviewed to determine if the assignment meets the criteria for JDA. If an employee
is currently on an ICAP assignment that meets the JDA criteria and completion of the assignment
is the last requirement for IC Officer (ICO) certification, the employee shall be awarded both
ICO and JDA Program certifications.

       6.3.2. Defense Intelligence Components shall continue to sponsor employee career
development training, even after the OCDP is phased out.

        6.3.3. Employees who are enrolled in the ICOT program may complete its required
course of study. Those employees who do not complete ICO requirements shall have ICOT
credit toward completion of the IC Joint Leadership Development Program.

    6.4. Exemptions. For a senior position to be exempted from the JDA Program certification
requirement, the Defense Intelligence Components must document that the senior position is
unique, requires rare or exceptional technical skills or expertise not found elsewhere in the IC, or
is part of a narrowly focused, highly specialized scientific, technical, or professional community
that exists only within a particular IC agency or element. Requests for exemption must be signed
by the Head of the Defense Intelligence Component and submitted to the USD(I&S). The
request must include:

       6.4.1. A description of the position in question.

        6.4.2. An organizational chart showing the relationship of that position to other senior
positions in the agency or element that are not exempted from the JDA Program requirement.

       6.4.3. Documentation regarding the position’s rare or exceptional technical or
professional qualification requirements.

       6.4.4. Where applicable, the qualifications and backgrounds of the position’s current and
previous incumbents.

   6.5. Waivers. In requesting a waiver from the JDA Program certification requirement for
promotion or permanent reassignment to a particular senior position, the Defense Intelligence
Component shall document that there are no highly qualified alternative candidates with JDA



Change 1, 10/05/2020                             7
                                                                      DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008


Program certification and that the mission of the Defense Intelligence Component would be
adversely impacted if that particular individual is not appointed, promoted, or placed into the
senior position in question. Requests for waiver shall be signed by the Head of the Defense
Intelligence Component and submitted to the USD(I&S). The request must include:

       6.5.1. A description of the senior position in question.

        6.5.2. A description of the process used to identify highly qualified candidates for the
position and the results of that process.

        6.5.3. A detailed description of the experience and qualifications of the individual for
whom the waiver is being requested, in comparison to those other highly qualified candidates for
the position who have earned JDA Program certification, including:

          6.5.3.1. Justification as to why the individual in question has been unable to satisfy
the JDA Program requirement.

           6.5.3.2. A detailed description of the adverse mission impact that would result if a
waiver is not granted in the particular case.

           6.5.3.3. Any other supporting rationale.

   6.6. Promotions

       6.6.1. Each Defense Intelligence Component shall remain responsible for the permanent
promotion of its employees who are on a JDA. Such promotions shall be in consultation in the
gaining element’s designated JDA senior point of contact prior to selection.

       6.6.2. Employees who have earned the JDA Program certification are not guaranteed a
promotion; however, employees who are on or who have completed a JDA shall be promoted at
an overall rate comparable to the aggregate population of their peers in the employing element.

        6.6.3. Appropriate JDA Program certification shall be considered a quality ranking factor
in the merit promotion process and accorded additional weight in the consideration of candidates
for promotion to a rank or a position of GG-14 or above (or equivalent).

        6.6.4. In those cases where a highly qualified candidate with JDA Program certification
is not selected for a particular permanent promotion, the Defense Intelligence Component shall
document the reasons for such non-selection in writing and retain such documentation in its
official files.

        6.6.5. The USD(I&S) shall review and compare overall promotion and employee base
pay increases to ensure that statutory requirements are being met, and may require a Defense
Intelligence Component take appropriate corrective action if it determines that employees with
JDA Program certification have been improperly disadvantaged in the promotion or senior
employee pay adjustment process.



Change 1, 10/05/2020                             8
                                                                       DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008



    6.7. External Candidates. In evaluating external candidates for appointment or promotion to
a senior position requiring JDA Program certification, the Head of a Defense Intelligence
Component may determine that a particular candidate’s relevant military, professional, technical,
managerial, and/or leadership experience outside the IC (for example, in another Federal agency,
the private sector, or an academic institution) is equivalent to, and thus satisfies the requirement
for, a JDA. To qualify as the equivalent of JDA, such assignment shall also be creditable toward
the general, technical, professional, managerial, or executive qualification requirements for the
position in question. Determinations in this regard shall be documented in writing and retained
by the agency or element.

    6.8. Reporting Requirements. Defense Intelligence Components shall provide reports to the
USD(I&S) to show how the JDA Program certification is being implemented. Specific reporting
format(s) shall be provided by OUSD(I&S) as needed to manage the JDA Program and to
respond to ODNI requests. Reports types include, but are not limited to:

       6.8.1. Promotion or permanent base pay increase data for GG-13s and above (or
equivalent).

       6.8.2. An inventory of senior positions.

       6.8.3. Listing of JDA-designated positions (all grades/levels).

       6.8.4. JDA-exempted positions.

       6.7.5. Individuals who received a JDA waiver.

   6.9. JDA MOA. The JDA MOA shall be used by all Defense Intelligence Components. The
MOA details the specific responsibilities of the employee, the employing element, and gaining
element, in relation to a specific and individual JDA.

   6.10. Reimbursement. Reimbursement for JDAs shall comply with all applicable laws.

   6.11. Reciprocity of Security Clearance and Access Determinations

        6.11.1. In accordance with Reference (e), to ensure the mobility and facilitate the
rotation of personnel performing JDAs, all security clearance background investigations and
access determinations completed by one IC element shall be accepted by all IC elements.
Further, all such security clearance investigations initiated by one element shall be transferable to
any element. No element may conduct an investigation to determine whether to grant a security
clearance to an individual in cases where a current investigation or clearance of equal level
already exists or has been granted by another element.

        6.11.2. If the gaining element requires the successful completion of a counterintelligence
polygraph for a JDA position, the employing element shall make the JDA selectee available on
duty time to take the polygraph at the gaining element’s expense or at its facility.



Change 1, 10/05/2020                              9
                                                                    DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008



    6.12. Phased Implementation. The requirements of this Instruction shall be implemented in
phases. The requirement for JDA Program certification shall begin with the most senior
leadership positions and incrementally expand to cover all senior positions. The schedule, with
specific dates and senior levels for implementation, shall be provided under separate
correspondence by the USD(I&S).


7. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS

The reporting requirements in this Instruction have been assigned Report Control Symbol (RCS)
DD-INTEL(AR)2264 in accordance with DoD Manual 8910.01 (Reference (g)).


8. RELEASIBILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


9. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This administrative change updates:

   a. The title of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence and Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (h)).

  b. Administrative changes in accordance with current standards of the Office of the Chief
Management Officer of the Department of Defense.


10. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective June 2, 2008.




Enclosures - 2
  E1. References
  E2. Definitions




Change 1, 10/05/2020                           10
                                                                                     DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008


                                                   ENCLOSURE 1

                                            REFERENCES, Continued


(e) DoD Instruction 1000.17, “Detail of DoD Personnel to Duty Outside the Department of
    Defense,” October 30, 2013
(f) Memorandum of Agreement Between the Secretary of Defense and the Director of National
    Intelligence, May 21, 2007 2
(g) DoD Manual 8910.01, “DoD Information Collections Manual,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(h) Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
    December 20, 2019




2
    Authorized users can view the MOA at https://usdi.dtic.mil/usdi_docs/keyref/usdi_keyref.cfm




Change 1, 10/05/2020                                       11                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                      DoDI 1400.36, June 2, 2008


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                         DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, the following terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this
Instruction only.

E2.1. Defense Intelligence Components. See Reference (b).

E2.2. Employing Element. The Intelligence Community (IC) element from which an employee
on a JDA is detailed (Reference (e)).

E2.3. Gaining Element. The IC element to which an employee is detailed while on a JDA
(Reference (e)).

E2.4. IC. For the purposes of this Instruction, IC elements include: the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence; the Central Intelligence Agency; the National Security Agency; the
Defense Intelligence Agency; the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency; the National
Reconnaissance Office; other offices within the Department of Defense for the collection of
specialized national intelligence through reconnaissance programs; the intelligence elements of
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
Drug Enforcement Agency, and the Department of Energy; the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research of the Department of State; the Office of Intelligence and Analysis of the Department
of the Treasury; the elements of the Department of Homeland Security concerned with the
analysis of intelligence information, including the Office of Intelligence of the Coast Guard; and
such other elements of any other department or agency as may be designated by the President, or
designated jointly by the Director of National Intelligence and the head of the department or
agency concerned, as an element of the IC.

E2.5. JDA Program Certification . The designation given to an employee who has completed
both components of the Joint IC Duty Assignment Program: a JDA and the JLDP.

E2.6. JDA

    E2.6.1. A component of the JDA Program defined as the temporary detail of an employee
from a position in one IC element to a rotational assignment in another IC element that requires
or provides appropriate joint IC duty experience for a period of at least 12 months but not more
than 36 months.

   E2.6.2. The permanent assignment of an employee from one IC element to a position in
another IC element, or a position within the employee’s own agency or element that has been
specifically designated as providing JDA credit.

E2.7. JLDP. A component of JDA Program defined as a training program designed to develop
the workforce who will lead with a community perspective and strategic outlook.



Change 1, 10/05/2020                            12                        ENCLOSURE 2
