                              Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 1100.23
                                                                              September 26, 2012
                                                    Incorporating Change 1, Effective June 1, 2020

                                                                                                CMO

SUBJECT:      Detail of Personnel to OSD

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Reissues Administrative Instruction (AI) 53 (Reference (a)) as a DoD Instruction (DoDI),
in accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5105.53 (Reference (b)), to establish
policy, assign responsibilities, and prescribe procedures for the assignment of detailed personnel to
OSD.

   b. Implements Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (c)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction:

   a. Applies to:

        (1) OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD.

       (2) Civilian and military personnel temporarily detailed to OSD. This includes:

           (a) Personnel working in OSD who are National Guard and Reserve (NGR) Service
members and who are not assigned or attached to Individual Mobilization Augmentee or
authorized OSD military manpower billets.

           (b) Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) personnel detailed to OSD.

           (c) Joint Intelligence Community Duty Assignment (JDA) program personnel.
                                                             DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


           (d) Developmental trainees.

           (e) Liaison personnel.

   b. Does not apply to:

       (1) The detail or assignment of:

          (a) OSD employees to other Federal agencies, which is governed by DoDI 1000.17
(Reference (d)).

          (b) OSD employees to organizations outside the Federal Government under the IPA
Program, pursuant to sections 3371-3376 of title 5, United States Code and part 334 of title 5,
Code of Federal Regulations (References (e) and (f)).

          (c) OSD personnel outside DoD under the JDA program, in accordance with DoDI
1400.36 (Reference (g)).

        (2) Intermittent and part-time representation by personnel from DoD Components on
Federal Advisory Committees, pursuant to DoDI 5105.04 (Reference (h)), ad hoc committees,
task forces, or working groups led or organized by OSD personnel.

     (3) NGR Service members who are assigned or attached to OSD, against authorized,
OSD military manpower billets or on annual training assignments of 15 days or fewer.

       (4) Temporary assignments to OSD from:

          (a) The Pathways Programs, in accordance with Part 362 of title 5, Code of Federal
Regulations (Reference (i)).

           (b) Other similar special programs.

       (5) Matrixed or temporarily assigned personnel from one OSD Component to another.

       (6) Experts and consultants, as governed by AI 2 (Reference (j)).

       (7) Employees of contractors.

     (8) Foreign exchange personnel assigned through appropriately coordinated
memorandums of agreement (MOAs) or memorandums of understanding.

        (9) For the purposes of this Instruction, the limits on details to OSD are not applicable to
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.



Change 1, 06/01/2020                             2
                                                             DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012



4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The OSD Components will accomplish assigned functions and mission objectives within
their authorized manpower resources.

    b. All personnel detailed to the OSD staff will be documented, in accordance with the
procedures outlined in this Instruction. Augmentation of the OSD staff by any means (to include
the use in an OSD Component of personnel assigned to a subordinate Defense Agency or DoD
Field Activity), without the express approval of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary of Defense, or
the Director of Administration and Management (DA&M), is prohibited.

    c. Details to OSD will be authorized only in exceptional circumstances, such as
emergencies, temporary requirements, and workload surges, or as a short-term measure when the
required knowledge and skills are not otherwise available from within the organization, are not
readily accessible through contract with the private sector, or when the temporary functions to be
performed are inherently governmental in nature.

    d. No more than 2 percent of an OSD Component’s full time or part time details (determined
as a percentage of the total number of military and civilian billets authorized for each Principal
Staff Assistant) may exceed a 365-day assignment. JDAs, IPA detailees, liaisons, and
developmental trainees or other personnel excluded by paragraph 2.b. will not count against this
2-percent limit.

   e. Details will not be used to:

       (1) Except for IPA detailees, JDAs, and liaisons, carry out continuing office functions,
enduring workload, or other activities that are not temporary, short term, or emergency.

        (2) Bypass or undermine OSD personnel ceilings or major headquarters activities
statutory provisions and policies, as established in section 143 of title 10, United States Code and
DoDI 5100.73 (References (k) and (l)); or to permanently augment authorized staff.

    f. The authority for an approved detail will expire upon its not-to-exceed date or the
departure of the incumbent, whichever occurs first, and will not be reused or refilled without new
authority from the DA&M. Details may be approved for a temporary period, but not to exceed
365 days.

   g. Requests for extension of a detail beyond 365 days will only be approved, by exception,
under unusual and compelling circumstances.

    h. To promote transparency and accountability of all details into OSD, each approved detail
will be reflected in the OSD Manpower Database, maintained by the Directorate for
Organizational and Management Planning (O&MP), Office of the DA&M.




Change 1, 06/01/2020                             3
                                                             DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


   i. Military personnel detailed to OSD will be kept to the absolute minimum necessary to
address temporary, short term, or emergency workload, and will only be assigned to address
workload that is military essential, in accordance with DoDD 1100.4 and DoDI 1100.22
(References (m) and (n)).

    j. Prospective detailed personnel will not report to OSD until required documentation is
submitted to, and approved by, the DA&M. Active duty military personnel will not be on orders
assigning them to OSD and reservists will not be “on status” to satisfy a detail request from
OSD.

    k. Approved military detailees are required to in-and out-process through the Military
Personnel Office, Washington Headquarters Services (WHS). Detailees will be required to bring
a copy of their approved detail memorandum, orders assigning them to their parent organization,
and their emergency contact information.

    l. All personnel support for military details, to include leave processing, will be provided by
the Service member’s “parent” organization to which they are permanently assigned.

    m. In accordance with Reference (c), the use of long-term detailed personnel (i.e., greater
than 365 days) within OSD will be limited to no more than 2 percent of the total manpower
assigned to each OSD Component.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This change updates the office of primary responsibility
designation and the Directives Division Website address, updates references, and removes
expiration language in accordance with current Chief Management Officer of the Department
of Defense direction.




Change 1, 06/01/2020                             4
                                                      DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective September 26, 2012.




                                         Michael L. Rhodes
                                         Director of Administration and Management

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 1, 06/01/2020                        5
                                                        DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a) Administrative Instruction 53, “Workforce Management,” June 26, 2000 (hereby
    cancelled)
(b) DoD Directive 5105.53, “Director of Administration and Management (DA&M),”
    February 26, 2008
(c) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Track Four Efficiency Initiatives Decisions,”
    March 14, 2011
(d) DoD Instruction 1000.17, “Detail of DoD Personnel to Duty Outside the Department of
    Defense,” October 30, 2013
(e) Sections 3371-3376 of title 5, United States Code
(f) Part 334 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations
(g) DoD Instruction 1400.36, “DoD Implementation of the Joint Intelligence Community Duty
    Assignment (JDA) Program,” June 2, 2008
(h) DoD Instruction 5105.04, “Department of Defense Federal Advisory Committee
    Management Program,” August 6, 2007
(i) Part 362 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations
(j) Administrative Instruction 2, “Employment of Experts and Consultants,” February 22,
    2012
(k) Sections 131 and 143 of title 10, United States Code
(l) DoD Instruction 5100.73, “Major DoD Headquarters Activities,” December 1, 2007, as
    amended
(m) DoD Directive 1100.4, “Guidance for Manpower Management,” February 12, 2005
(n) DoD Instruction 1100.22, “Policy and Procedures for Determining Workforce Mix,”
    April 12, 2010, as amended




Change 1, 06/01/2020                         6                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                            DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. DA&M. The DA&M will:

   a. Analyze and evaluate requests for details to OSD, approve or disapprove such requests,
and establish the not-to-exceed date for approved details.

   b. Approve exceptional requests to extend a detail beyond 365 days, when justified by
unusual and compelling circumstances, for up to an additional 365 days maximum.

  c. Maintain in the OSD Manpower Database current data on approved details to the OSD
Components.

   d. Oversee annual accountability and certification statements of detail assignment record
keeping from the OSD Components.

    e. Issue an annual validation of the maximum 2 percent long-term detailed personnel
allowance.


2. DIRECTOR, WHS. The Director, WHS, through the WHS Human Resources Directorate,
will provide approved IPA agreements processing and associated security processing.


3. HEADS OF THE OSD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the OSD Components will:

  a. Determine the need for a temporary detail, and submit appropriate documentation to the
DA&M.

   b. Confirm that the required manpower, knowledge, and skills are not already available
within the existing workforce or that contract support cannot be used to satisfy the requirement.

    c. Require that personnel detailed to their respective Components have appropriate security
clearances.

   d. Identify the funding source, in coordination with the WHS Financial Management
Directorate, for approved reimbursable details.

    e. Submit a request for extension of a detail, by exception and only when justified by
unusual and compelling circumstances, to the DA&M, in writing, at least 30 days prior to the
original detail not-to-exceed date.




Change 1, 06/01/2020                            7                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


    f. Require that detailed personnel do not report until approval is obtained; that they remain
permanently assigned to their parent organization’s rolls for the duration of the detail; and that
they are either returned to their parent organization, released from duty, or placed on a
permanent manpower authorization by their not-to-exceed date.

    g. Certify to the DA&M, annually, that all personnel detailed to their respective Components
are properly documented.




Change 1, 06/01/2020                             8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


                                          ENCLOSURE 3

                                          PROCEDURES


1. Detailed personnel will remain on their parent organization’s personnel rolls, but will be
identified in the OSD Manpower Database by a five-digit code, beginning with the prefix “D”
and followed by four numbers.

2. Requests for approval of liaisons and personnel in JDA assignments must include a copy of
an MOA (see Figure 1 in Appendix) signed by both the OSD Component Head and the head of
the organization that the employee represents or is permanently assigned. Liaison details and
personnel in JDAs may be extended for periods greater than that of other details.

3. Approved IPA detailees on the OSD staff will be recorded as details to the appropriate OSD
Component.

4. The OSD Components will:

    a. Send requests for approval of details (see Figure 2 in Appendix) to the DA&M, ATTN:
Director, O&MP. Such requests will be signed by the Head of the OSD Component, the
Principal Deputy, or equivalent, and provide detailed justification for the detail in the request, to
include:

       (1) A description of the nature of the temporary, short-term, or emergency workload; the
source of the workload; and how long the workload is expected to continue.

       (2) If requesting a military detail, a statement, with supporting rationale, that the
requirement is military essential, in accordance with the guidance in Reference (n).

        (3) Certification that the work to be performed cannot be accomplished within available
resources; that required knowledge and skills are inherently governmental; or when not
inherently governmental, that they are not readily accessible through contract with the private
sector.

    b. Notify the DA&M if an approved detail departs temporary assignment to OSD, prior to
the not-to-exceed date.

   c. Submit requests for IPA detailees to the DA&M using the IPA agreement.




Change 1, 06/01/2020                              9                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


                                 APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3

                   SAMPLE LIAISON MOA AND REQUEST FOR DETAIL

                                 Figure 1. Liaison MOA Example

                              MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT (MOA)
                                         BETWEEN THE
                                  (Liaison’s Parent Organization)
                                            AND THE
                                        (OSD Component)


  1. PURPOSE: To codify the agreement between the (Parent Organization Head) and the (OSD
  Component Head) regarding the establishment of a liaison to the OSD staff for the purposes of closer
  coordination and cooperation on matters of mutual interest pertaining to (functional activity xxxx).

  2. OBJECTIVES: (Describe objectives)

  3. ORGANIZATION AND COMMAND RELATIONSHIPS:

     a. The Liaison Officer will be the representative of the (Parent Organization Head) to the (OSD
  Component Head) and report to (OSD Component Point of Contact) for assignment to duty.

      b. The Liaison Officer, with duty at (location), will remain administratively assigned to the
  (Parent Organization). (Describe other reporting relationships, as required.)

      c. (Describe how the annual personnel evaluation will be accomplished.)

  4. RESPONSIBILITIES: (Describe the specific responsibilities/duties of the liaison officer. Include
  a statement regarding the length of the liaison agreement.)

  5. ADMINISTRATION: (Describe support requirements, space, and other administrative issues
  requiring agreement.)

  6. EFFECTIVE DATE: This MOA becomes effective upon the signature of the authorized officials
  of the representative Parties. It will remain in effect until terminated by either Party.

  7. LIMITATIONS: (if applicable)

  8. APPROVAL:

  Signature Block                                                           Signature Block
  Date:____________                                                         Date: ____________




Change 1, 06/01/2020                              10        APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


                                Figure 2. Request for Detail Example

 Subject: Request for Temporary Detail (indicate if the proposed detail is also a liaison or JDA, and if
 so, attach the signed MOA)

     Request approval to detail the individual identified below in accordance with DoDI 1100.ii.

         Full Name: (self explanatory—see note below)

         Grade/Rank: (self explanatory)

         Parent Organization: (the organization to which the individual remains permanently
 assigned)

         Office where individual will be detailed: (self explanatory)

         Proposed Start Date: (self explanatory)

         Proposed Not-to-Exceed Date: (not to exceed 365 days from the proposed start date, unless
 the proposed detail is a liaison or JDA, and is clearly identified as such in the subject line above and
 accompanied with an MOA.)

         Organizational Code: (The code, as established in the OSD Manpower Database, that
 represents the organizational element where the detailed personnel will be temporarily working)

         Reimbursable or Non-reimbursable Detail: (state which)

         Employee will remain on parent organization’s rolls: (confirmation)

           Justification for Detail: (Discuss the temporary, short term, or emergency workload the
 detailed individual is required to address, including the source or driver of the workload and how long
 it is projected to last. Certify that the work to be performed is not a continuing, permanent workload,
 existing resources are not available to address the work, and state why the workload is not appropriate
 for contract support. If the requested detail is military, include a statement that the workload is
 military essential and provide rationale.)

                                                   Signature Block
                                                   (signed by OSD Component Head,
                                                   Principal Deputy, or equivalent)

 Note: Do not provide any personal information in the request for detail beyond the name and
 grade/rank. Do not append resumes or other personal information to the request. The only document
 that may be appended is the liaison or JDA MOA, if applicable.




Change 1, 06/01/2020                                11        APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AI          administrative instruction

DA&M        Director of Administration and Management
DoDD        DoD directive
DoDI        DoD instruction

IPA         Intergovernmental Personnel Act

JDA         Joint Intelligence Community Duty Assignment

MOA         memorandum of agreement

NGR         National Guard and Reserve

O&MP        Organizational and Management Planning

WHS         Washington Headquarters Services


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

authorized manpower. The funded, permanently authorized civilian and military billets assigned
to an OSD Component, as documented in the OSD Manpower Database.

consultant. A person who can provide valuable and pertinent advice generally drawn from a
high degree of broad administrative, professional, or technical knowledge or experience. When
an agency requires public advisory participation, a consultant also may be a person who is
affected by a particular program and can provide useful views from personal experience.

expert. A person who is specially qualified by education and experience to perform difficult and
challenging tasks in a particular field, beyond the usual range of achievement of competent
persons in that field. An expert is regarded by other persons in the field as an authority or
practitioner of unusual competence and skill in a professional, scientific, technical, or other
activity.

detail. Attachment of an individual to OSD for a limited period of time, not to exceed 365 days,
with the individual remaining on his or her parent organization’s personnel rolls.



Change 1, 06/01/2020                             12                          GLOSSARY
                                                            DoDI 1100.23, September 26, 2012


IPA detail. An individual detailed to an OSD Component while remaining an employee of a
qualifying organization through the IPA Mobility Program, pursuant to References (e) and (f),
that provides for the temporary assignment of personnel between the Federal Government and
State and local governments, colleges and universities, Indian tribal governments, Federally
Funded Research and Development Centers, and other eligible organizations. Does not include
an individual participating in the IPA Mobility Program that is appointed as a temporary Federal
employee of an OSD Component, pursuant to the Section 3374(a)(1) of Reference (e).

JDA detail. An individual detailed to an OSD Component, through the JDA Program, which
provides substantive professional, technical, or leadership experience in more than one
Intelligence Community element, department, or organization.

liaison. An individual detailed to an OSD Component to act as a go-between to promote
effective communication on behalf of his or her parent organization with the OSD Component to
further the accomplishment of a common purpose.

matrixed personnel. Individuals who are embedded in one OSD Component with an operational
reporting superior, but have a functional reporting superior in their parent OSD Component.

nonreimbursable detail. A detail for which the gaining OSD Component does not reimburse the
detailed individual’s parent organization for services provided by the detailed individual.

OSD. The principal staff and staff elements used by the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of
Defense to exercise authority, direction, and control over the DoD, as defined in section 131 of
Reference (k).

OSD Component. One of the offices that compose OSD, and whose principal reports directly to
the Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Defense.

OSD Manpower Database. The authoritative database, managed by O&MP, that documents
funded and authorized civilian, active duty military, and reservist manpower; and approved
details to OSD.

reimbursable detail. A detail for which the gaining OSD Component reimburses the detailed
individual’s parent organization for services provided by the detailed individual.




Change 1, 06/01/2020                            13                           GLOSSARY
