                             Department of Defense
                                   DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 3020.04
                                                                              August 25, 2010
                                                         Incorporating Change 1, April 18, 2024

                                                                                      GC, DoD

SUBJECT:     Order of Succession Pursuant to Executive Order 13963 and the Federal Vacancies
             Reform Act of 1998

References: (a) DoD Directive 3020.04, “Order of Succession Under Executive Order 13394
                and the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998,” December 14, 2006 (hereby
                cancelled)
            (b) Sections 3345 through 3349d of title 5, United States Code (also known and
                referred to in this Directive as “The Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, as
                amended”)
            (c) Executive Order 12908, “Order of Succession of Officers To Act as Secretary
                of the Army,” April 22, 1994
            (d) Executive Order 12879, “Order of Succession of Officers To Act as Secretary
                of the Navy,” November 8, 1993
            (e) Executive Order 12909, “Order of Succession of Officers To Act as Secretary
                of the Air Force,” April 22, 1994


1. PURPOSE. This Directive reissues Reference (a) and, pursuant to The Federal Vacancies
Reform Act of 1998, as amended (Reference (b)) and Executive Order 13963, “Providing an
Order of Succession Within the Department of Defense,” December 10, 2020 (Enclosure):

   a. Republishes the order of succession to act as the Secretary of Defense.

   b. Establishes the order of succession to act as other Presidentially-Appointed, Senate-
Confirmed (PAS) officials in the Department of Defense, except for the Secretaries of the
Military Departments, whose order of succession is governed by References (c) through (e).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense.
                                                                  DoDD 3020.04, August 25, 2010


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The order of succession to act as the Secretary of Defense shall be that in the event of the
death, resignation, or inability of the Secretary of Defense to perform the functions and duties of
the office of Secretary of Defense, the DoD officials, in the order listed in the Enclosure, shall
act for, and exercise the powers of, the Secretary of Defense.

   b. The authority to act as a PAS official other than the Secretary of Defense shall be:

        (1) For every office within the Department to which appointment is required to be made
by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate (PAS office) for which there is a
Principal Deputy to the PAS office, the Principal Deputy shall be the First Assistant for the
purposes of Reference (b).

        (2) For any PAS office not covered by subparagraph 3.b.(1) of this section, the First
Assistant shall be the person designated in writing by the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy
Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Military Department concerned, or other PAS
official(s) concerned. This authority may not be redelegated.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. The officials listed in the Enclosure shall be fully familiar with the
order of succession to the position of Secretary of Defense. Other officials designated as a First
Assistant for the purposes of Reference (b) to a PAS office shall be fully familiar with the order
of succession to the respective PAS office.


5. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Directive is approved for public release and is
available on the DoD Issuances Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This administrative change updates the Executive order for the
order of succession for the Department of Defense and makes other administrative revisions for
currency and accuracy.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective upon its publication to the DoD Issuances
Website.




Enclosure
   Executive Order 13963



Change 1, 04/18/2024                             2
                                                                 DoDD 3020.04, August 25, 2010


                                          ENCLOSURE

                                  EXECUTIVE ORDER 13963

              Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Defense
                                      December 10, 2020


    By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United
States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, as amended, 5 U.S.C.
3345 et seq., it is hereby ordered as follows:

    Section 1. Order of Succession. (a) Subject to the provisions of section 2 of this order, the
following officials of the Department of Defense, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the
functions and duties of the office of the Secretary of Defense (Secretary) during any period in
which the Secretary has died, resigned, or otherwise become unable to perform the functions and
duties of the office of the Secretary, until such time as the Secretary is able to perform the
functions and duties of that office:

       (i) Deputy Secretary of Defense;

       (ii) Secretaries of the Military Departments;

       (iii) Under Secretary of Defense for Policy;

       (iv) Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security;

       (v) Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense;

       (vi) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment;

       (vii) Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering;

       (viii) Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller);

       (ix) Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness;

       (x) Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Policy;

       (xi) Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security;

       (xii) Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment;

       (xii) Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering;

       (xiv) Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller);



Change 1, 04/18/2024                             3                                  ENCLOSURE
                                                                  DoDD 3020.04, August 25, 2010



       (xv) Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness;

       (xvi) General Counsel of the Department of Defense, Assistant Secretaries of Defense,
       Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation, Director of Operational Test and
       Evaluation, and Chief Information Officer of the Department of Defense;

       (xvii) Under Secretaries of the Military Departments; and

       (xviii) Assistant Secretaries of the Military Departments, and General Counsels of the
       Military Departments.

    (b) Precedence among officers designated within the same paragraph of subsection (a) of
this section shall be determined by the order in which they have been appointed to such office.
Where officers designated within the same paragraph of subsection (a) of this section have the
same appointment date, precedence shall be determined by the order in which they have taken
the oath to serve in that office.

   Sec. 2. Exceptions. (a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 1(a) of this
order in an acting capacity, by virtue of so serving, shall act as Secretary pursuant to this order.

    (b) No individual listed in section 1(a) of this order shall act as Secretary unless that
individual was appointed to an office for which appointment is required to be made by the
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and that individual is otherwise
eligible to so serve under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, as amended.

    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, to the
extent permitted by law, to depart from this order in designating an Acting Secretary.

   Sec. 3. Revocation. Executive Order 13533 of March 1, 2010 (Providing an Order of
Succession Within the Department of Defense) is hereby revoked.

    Sec. 4. General Provision. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or
benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United
States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other
person.

                                                      DONALD J. TRUMP

THE WHITE HOUSE
December 10, 2020




Change 1, 04/18/2024                             4                                   ENCLOSURE
