                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 1000.28
                                                                                February 1, 2010
                                               Incorporating Change 1, Effective October 5, 2018

                                                                                             CMO
SUBJECT: Armed Forces Retirement Home (AFRH)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

   a. Establishes policies and assigns responsibilities in accordance with chapter 10 of title 24,
United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (a)) for management and oversight of the AFRH in
accordance with the authority in Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (b)) and DoD
Directive 5124.02 (Reference (c)).

   b. Formalizes the basic standards and procedures for administration of the AFRH.

   c. Incorporates and cancels DoD Instruction 4161.03 (Reference (d)).

   d. Identifies the authority to appoint the Chief Operating Officer (COO) and other officials.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), the Defense Agencies,
the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense.
This Instruction also applies to the AFRH. The term “Military Services,” as used herein, refers
to the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps.


3. DEFINITIONS

    a. AFRH. An independent establishment in the Executive Branch, established pursuant to
Reference (a), to provide health care, programs, residences, and related services to meet the
quality of life needs of certain retired and former Military Service members. The AFRH consists
of two separate facilities: AFRH-Washington and AFRH-Gulfport.
                                                                  DoDI 1000.28, February 1, 2010



    b. AFRH COO. A Federal official appointed to serve as the Head of the AFRH and
responsible for its overall direction, operation, and management.

    c. facility director. A Federal official appointed by the Under Secretary of Defense for
Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)) or the Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for
Personnel and Readiness (PDUSD(P&R)) who reports directly to the AFRH COO and is
responsible for day-to-day operations of the AFRH facility.

    d. civilian accrediting agency. A nationally recognized civilian agency (e.g., the Continuing
Care Accreditation Commission or Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities)
responsible for accrediting facilities providing continuing care retirement services.

    e. trust fund. A permanent fund established in the Treasury of the United States for AFRH
operation. Funds are generated through deductions from the pay of enlisted Service members,
warrant officers, and limited duty officers; fines and forfeitures pursuant to section 2772 of title
10, U.S.C (Reference (e)); resident fees; the sale or lease of property and facilities; gifts and
bequeathments; interest gained from the trust fund balance; and amounts that may be transferred
to the fund.


4. POLICY

     a. The AFRH shall provide a nationally accredited continuing care retirement facility for
eligible veterans of the home. The focus of the AFRH will be on attaining the highest quality of
life for residents using performance-driven, efficient management systems and quality
programming; developing a motivated, high-performing, diverse workforce at every
organizational level of the AFRH; and establishing a network of cooperation with local civilian
and military medical providers, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), military installations,
city management, and professional organizations.

    b. The AFRH is not part of the Department of Defense and is not subject to DoD policy and
issuances except when expressly made applicable to the AFRH.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The reporting requirements in this Instruction do not
require licensing with a report control symbol in accordance with Paragraphs 7, 8, and 10 of
Volume 1 of DoD Manual 8910.01 (Reference (f)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division
Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 1, 10/05/2018                             2
                                                               DoDI 1000.28, February 1, 2010



8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are a result of transfer of
responsibility for the instruction to the Office of the Chief Management Officer of the
Department of Defense and updates to administrative information regarding information
collections, releasability, and effective dates.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective February 1, 2010.




                                               Gail H. McGinn
                                               Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Plans)
                                               Performing the Duties of the
                                                 Under Secretary of Defense for
                                                 Personnel and Readiness

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities




Change 1, 10/05/2018                           3
                                                          DoDI 1000.28, February 1, 2010

                                    ENCLOSURE 1

                                     REFERENCES


(a) Chapter 10 of title 24, United States Code
(b) Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegation of Authority,” March 20, 2003
(c) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
(d) DoD Instruction 4161.03, “Triennial Inspection of the Armed Forces Retirement Home,”
    June 26, 2006 (hereby canceled)
(e) Section 2772 of title 10, United States Code
(f) DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
    DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(g) Chapter 35 of title 31, United States Code
(h) Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-127, “Financial Management Systems,”
    July 23, 1993
(i) Title 5, United States Code




Change 1, 10/05/2018                    4                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 1000.28, February 1, 2010

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. PDUSD(P&R). The PDUSD(P&R), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), shall:

   a. Exercise authority, direction, and control over the AFRH COO and the AFRH. Provide
oversight of the AFRH trust fund, operations, quality of care, outside inspections, and
accreditation.

   b. Appoint the AFRH COO, facility directors, and deputy and associate directors.

   c. Evaluate the performance of the AFRH COO annually and determine compensation in
accordance with section 415 of Reference (a).

   d. Coordinate and monitor the inspections and correction of discrepancies to ensure
compliance with chapter 10 of Reference (a) and submit the report and plan to Congress as
required by section 418(e)(2) of Reference (a).

    e. Solicit special interest items from Service Components and submit them for inclusion in
the IG DoD inspections.

   f. Coordinate with the AFRH the inspection schedule established by the IG DoD.

    g. Maintain compliance criteria and coordinate inspection criteria and reporting requirements
with the IG DoD and the AFRH COO. Major areas of inspection will include:
admissions/eligibility, civil engineering, command climate/follow-up, contracting, estate matters,
financial management, human resources management, information technology, health care
services/follow-up, records management, resident services, safety, security, and senior
management.

    h. Appoint full-time or permanent part-time Federal employees as members of the AFRH
Local Boards of Trustees and designate one member of a local board to serve as the chairperson
of the Local Board of Trustees.

    i. Submit an annual report to Congress on the financial and other affairs of the AFRH,
including an assessment of all aspects of each facility, especially the quality of care.

   j. Acquire and dispose of property in accordance with section 411(e) of Reference (a).

   k. Make available from the Department of Defense, on a nonreimbursable basis,
administrative support and services authorized pursuant to section 411(f) of Reference (a).




Change 1, 10/05/2018                        5                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 1000.28, February 1, 2010

    l. Designate a medical IG of a Military Department to assist the IG DoD in AFRH
inspections.


2. AFRH COO. The AFRH COO is appointed by and subject to the authority, direction, and
control of the USD(P&R) and the PDUSD(P&R) according to Reference (b). The AFRH COO
reports to the PDUSD(P&R) through the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Military
Community and Family Policy (DUSD(MC&FP)) and the Principal Director (MC&FP), who
have day-to-day oversight over policy matters and congressional affairs regarding the AFRH.
The AFRH COO shall:

   a. Appoint and compensate staff to assist in administration of the AFRH pursuant to
Reference (b), to include exercising authority, direction, and control over the facility directors.

    b. Maintain an AFRH Master Plan and articulate the details of the plan to AFRH
stakeholders (USD(P&R), Congress, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), residents,
and interested Washington, D.C., parties) including planned revenue streams and the role of the
AFRH and General Services Administration in the long-term management and oversight of
leased property and development.

   c. Manage the operation and administration of AFRH-Washington and AFRH-Gulfport
consistent with statute, applicable rules and regulations, and industry standards.

    d. Ensure the AFRH Local Boards of Trustees maintain a current charter, convene at least
biannually, maintain current board membership as directed by statute, and disseminate
information from meetings to the PDUSD(P&R), DUSD(MC&FP), and board members in a
timely manner.

   e. Establish public affairs communication policies and procedures to ensure all media,
materials, reports, and correspondence are consistent with PDUSD(P&R) guidance.

    f. Ensure the AFRH is operated in a fiscally responsible manner, the trust fund remains
solvent, and the AFRH receives annual unqualified audits of the financial accounts. Provide the
PDUSD(P&R) with budgetary briefings prior to submission of any budgetary documents to
Congress.

    g. Ensure all medical standards are maintained and coordinate medical support and
partnerships with the VA, military treatment facilities, TRICARE facilities, and other local
medical providers to give residents the highest level of medical and dental care possible within
the resources available.

    h. Ensure a comprehensive climate assessment for residents and staff is completed biennially
at a minimum and report findings to the PDUSD(P&R).




Change 1, 10/05/2018                          6                                     ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1000.28, February 1, 2010

    i. Make all staff, other personnel, and records available to the IG DoD and accreditation
inspections. Correct all discrepancies identified in the IG DoD and accreditation inspections
conducted in accordance with this Instruction and report follow-on actions as required.

    j. Secure, in conjunction with the IG DoD inspection, accreditations by a nationally
recognized civilian accrediting organization for each aspect of each facility, including medical
and dental care, pharmacy operations, independent living, assisted living, and nursing care.
Provide all requested accreditation reports to the IG DoD prior to the inspection.

   k. Meet all requirements of chapter 10 of Reference (a) and all subsequent legislative
requirements.

   l. Inform the DUSD(MC&FP) of all communications with Congress. Ensure prior
PDUSD(P&R) review of all materials provided to Congress, to include the annual Performance
and Accountability Report.

   m. Ensure AFRH personnel, programs, and business practices follow the laws, policies, and
regulations of the Federal government by which the AFRH is managed.


3. DEPUTY DIRECTOR, TRICARE MANAGEMENT ACTIVITY (TMA). The Deputy
Director, TMA, under the authority, direction, and control of the Director, TMA, shall:

   a. Serve as the senior medical advisor to the AFRH in addition to performing all other duties
and responsibilities assigned.

   b. Provide advice to the Secretary of Defense, the USD(P&R), the PDUSD(P&R), the
DUSD(MC&FP), and the AFRH COO regarding the direction and oversight of the provision of
medical, preventive mental health, and dental care services at each facility of the AFRH.

   c. Ensure the timely availability to residents, at locations other than the AFRH, of such acute
medical, mental health, and dental care as such residents require that is not available at the
AFRH.

   d. Ensure compliance with accreditation standards and applicable health care standards.

    e. Periodically visit and inspect medical facilities and medical operations of each AFRH
facility.

   f. Periodically examine and audit medical records and medical administration of the AFRH.

    g. Consult with the Local Board(s) of Trustees for each AFRH facility not less frequently
than once a year and provide advice to the Local Board(s) of Trustees on the AFRH regarding all
medical and medical administrative matters of the facility.




Change 1, 10/05/2018                         7                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1000.28, February 1, 2010

4. IG DoD. The IG DoD shall:

   a. Inspect the AFRH, including the records, to ensure compliance with applicable laws and
regulations pertaining to nursing care, long-term care, and medical facilities, including sections
401, 411, 412, 413, 416, and 418 of Reference (a); chapter 35 of title 31, U.S.C. (Reference (g));
OMB Circular A-127 (Reference (h)); and personnel policies contained in title 5, U.S.C.
(Reference (i)).

      (1) The IG DoD inspection will focus on the overall administration and management of
the AFRH.

        (2) The civilian accrediting agency will inspect and accredit the AFRH in all facets of
continuing care and medical services. The IG DoD will review the accreditation reports from the
civilian agency to ensure appropriate AFRH follow-up. The accreditation reports will
accompany the IG DoD inspection report.

    b. Inspect the AFRH in any year in which a facility of the AFRH is not inspected by a
nationally recognized civilian accrediting agency.

        (1) Inspection will include all aspects of each facility including independent living,
assisted living, medical and dental care, pharmacy operations, financial and contracting records,
and any aspect of a facility the Local Boards of Trustees or Resident Advisory Council (RAC)
recommends.

       (2) Solicit concerns, observations, and recommendations from the Local Boards of
Trustees, the RAC, and facility residents. Resident input will be solicited on a non-attribution
basis.

        (3) Use the AFRH inspection criteria (paragraphs 1.g. and 4.a. of this enclosure) as the
basis for the inspection. Submit additional inspection criteria deemed appropriate to the
PDUSD(P&R) and the AFRH COO in advance of the inspection.

    c. Prepare a report to Congress and the Secretary of Defense, the USD(P&R), the AFRH
COO, the Director(s) of the AFRH, the senior medical advisor, and the Local Board(s) of
Trustees, in coordination with the PDUSD(P&R), describing the results of each inspection and
including appropriate recommendations. The final report must be prepared in sufficient time to
meet the 45-day reporting requirement in section 418(c)(1) of Reference (a).

    d. Upon completion of the inspection, submit a recommendation with appropriate rationale
to the PDUSD(P&R) as to whether the discrepancies are sufficient to warrant a follow-up
inspection within 12 months.


5. LOCAL BOARDS OF TRUSTEES. The Local Boards of Trustees shall:

   a. Serve in an advisory capacity to the facility director and the AFRH COO.

Change 1, 10/05/2018                         8                                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1000.28, February 1, 2010



    b. Provide to the COO and the director of the facility such guidance and recommendations
on the administration of the facility as the Local Board considers appropriate.

    c. Provide to the USD(P&R), not less often than annually, an assessment of all aspects of the
facility, including the quality of care at the facility.

  d. Consist of at least 11 members who shall be appointed by the PDUSD(P&R). Specific
members will be appointed in accordance with section 416 of Reference (a). At least one
member of each Local Board of Trustees shall have a perspective that is oriented toward the
AFRH overall. The Local Board of Trustees for a facility shall consist of the following
members:

       (1) One member who is a civilian expert in nursing home or retirement home
administration and financing from the geographical area of the facility.

        (2) One member who is a civilian expert in gerontology from the geographical area of
the facility.

       (3) One member who is a Service expert in financial management.

        (4) One representative of the VA regional office nearest in proximity to the facility, who
shall be designated by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.

       (5) One representative of the resident advisory committee or council of the facility.

       (6) One enlisted representative of the Services’ Retiree Advisory Council.

       (7) One senior noncommissioned officer of one of the Military Services.

       (8) One senior representative of the military hospital nearest in proximity to the facility.

       (9) One senior judge advocate from one of the Military Services.

       (10) The facility director, who shall be a nonvoting member.

       (11) One senior representative of one of the chief personnel officers of the Military
Services.

       (12) Other members designated by the PDUSD(P&R) (if the Local Board of Trustees is
to have more than 11 members).

   e. Have one member designated by the PDUSD(P&R) to serve as the chairperson.




Change 1, 10/05/2018                         9                                     ENCLOSURE 2
