                              Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION
                                                                                  NUMBER 3020.48
                                                                                        March 6, 2009
                                                                 Incorporating Change 2, May 12, 2017

                                                                                                     USD(P)

SUBJECT:       Guidance for Maritime Operational Threat Response (MOTR)-Related
               Conferencing Coordination Activities Implementation

References: (a) “Maritime Operational Threat Response for the National Strategy for
                Maritime Security,” October 2006 1
            (b) “MOTR Protocols,” Series1
            (c) DoD Directive 2060.02, “DoD Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
                (WMD) Policy,” January 27, 2017
            (d) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),”
                December 8, 1999
            (e) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,”
                November 30, 2006

1. PURPOSE. This Instruction establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides
instructions for Maritime Operational Threat Response (MOTR)-related conferencing
coordination in accordance with the guidance in References (a) through (c) and the authority in
References (d) and (e).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

    a. Coordinate with MOTR agencies across the range of maritime response activities to act
quickly and decisively to counter maritime threats. These activities include the deployment of
capabilities and use of force required to intercept, apprehend, exploit, and, when necessary,
defeat maritime threats.


1
 Copies are available to authorized users via the Defense SECRET Internet Protocol Router Network (SIPRNET) at
http://www.uscg.smil.mil/sites/gmcc/default.aspx
                                                                    DoDI 3020.48, March 6, 2009


   b. Employ the integrated network of existing national-level maritime command centers to
achieve coordinated, unified, timely, and effective planning and operational response to the full
range of maritime security threats globally, consistent with desired national outcomes.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Web Site at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
releasability, effective date, organizational titles, and references for accuracy.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective March 6, 2009.




Enclosure
   Responsibilities




Change 2, 05/12/2017                            2
                                                                  DoDI 3020.48, March 6, 2009


                                         ENCLOSURE

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall:

   a. Provide contact information to the Washington Headquarters Services (WHS) Secretary of
Defense Communications Office and the Joint Staff for appropriate senior leader and staff
engagement during MOTR coordination events.

    b. Represent the Department of Defense in interagency policy discussions during MOTR
calls and for updates to the MOTR Protocols-related procedures, exercises, and training
opportunities.

    c. Issue additional policy guidance as required for effective MOTR-related participation by
the Department of Defense.


2. DIRECTOR, WHS. The Director, WHS, under the authority, direction, and control of the
Director of Administration, Office of the Deputy Chief Management Officer, shall:

   a. Provide and maintain operational support communications and information conduits to the
OSD staff for MOTR-related information through the Secretary of Defense Communications
Office.

   b. Provide assistance to the National Military Command Center (NMCC) in attaining
communications with the specified OSD senior leadership in time-critical situations.


3. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:

   a. Act as DoD lead for conducting MOTR-related conferencing coordination within the
Department of Defense.

    b. Ensure the NMCC establishes appropriate DoD protocols and procedures to ensure the
appropriate Combatant Commanders (CCDRs) assume lead or supporting agency responsibilities
identified in References (a) and (b) and further detailed in References (c) and (d).

   c. Establish guidance for CCDRs to participate, as appropriate, in MOTR calls and related
conferencing coordination activities, pursuant to the MOTR Plan and Protocols.

    d. Ensure appropriate representatives of the DoD Components have sufficient information
for timely participation in MOTR-related conference events.



Change 2, 05/12/2017                           3                                  ENCLOSURE
                                                                  DoDI 3020.48, March 6, 2009


    e. Represent DoD in interagency operational discussions during MOTR calls and for updates
to MOTR-related procedures, exercises, and training opportunities. Ensure that CCDRs are
provided an opportunity to comment on all proposed MOTR-related procedure changes.

   f. Provide supplemental guidance to the Joint Staff and CCDRs and revise existing
documents as necessary to implement this Instruction.


4. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. The General Counsel of
the Department of Defense shall:

  a. Provide legal advice on maritime response activities, including through participation in
MOTR coordination events.

    b. Provide contact information to the Secretary of Defense Communications Office and the
Joint Staff for appropriate senior leader and staff engagement during MOTR coordination events.




Change 2, 05/12/2017                           4                                  ENCLOSURE
