                                   Department of Defense
                                     INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 5105.58
                                                                                  April 22, 2009
                                           Incorporating Change 2, Effective September 24, 2020

                                                                                        USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:       Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT)

References:    See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5105.58 (Reference (a)) to
establish policy, assign responsibilities, and provide instructions for MASINT management in
accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01 (Reference (b)) and consistent
with DoDD 5105.21 (Reference (c)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”). The term “Military Services,” as used herein, refers to the Army, the
Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps (including Active and Reserve Components).

   b. Other non-DoD Governmental entities that are conducting MASINT under Secretary of
Defense authority.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. MASINT operations and activities shall be treated as high priority efforts and receive full
and pro-active support in all resourcing and programmatic actions.

   b. DoD MASINT activities will be executed in a coordinated, coherent, and decentralized
manner to effectively respond to U.S. Defense Intelligence priorities in support of national
                                                                     DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


security objectives, and in accordance with all applicable laws, Presidential directives, and
applicable DoD guidelines and, when appropriate, consistent with Director of National
Intelligence (DNI) guidelines.

    c. MASINT data and products or new MASINT capabilities or tools will be compatible and
consistent, as practicable, with DoD and Intelligence Community (IC) data standards,
architectures, processes, and procedures. In addition, MASINT data and products will be
accessible, and intelligence sources and methods will be protected through applicable
classification, compartmentation, and dissemination controls.

  d. DoD elements with data from non-intelligence DoD sensor systems that have potential
MASINT attributes or capabilities shall, to the greatest extent practicable, provide that data to the
MASINT community to accomplish MASINT objectives and meet DoD and IC requirements.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. Intelligence continuity plans, including all response
mechanisms and reporting requirements referred to in this Instruction, do not require licensing
with a report control symbol in accordance with Paragraph 3 of Volume 1 of DoD Manual
8910.01 (Reference (d)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and
Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (e)).




Change 2, 09/24/2020                             2
                                                              DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective April 22, 2009.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   Glossary




Change 2, 09/24/2020                        3
                                                                                  DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


                                                 ENCLOSURE 1

                                                 REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Instruction 5105.58, “Management of Measurement and Signature Intelligence
      (MASINT),” February 9, 1993 (hereby canceled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
      (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(c)   DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(d)   DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for
      DoD Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(e)   Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
      December 20, 2019
(f)   Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” as amended
(g)   DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(h)   DoD Directive 5250.01, “Management of Intelligence Mission Data (IMD) in DoD
      Acquisition,” January 22, 2013, as amended
(i)   Director of National Intelligence Memorandum, “(U) Execution of the Measurement and
      Signature Intelligence Services of Common Concern,” December 22, 2007 1
(j)   DoD Instruction 3305.16, “DoD Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT)
      Training and Certification,” August 13, 2015, as amended
(k)   Memorandum of Agreement Between the Director of National Intelligence and the
      Secretary of Defense, “Management of Acquisition Programs Executed at the Department
      of Defense Community Elements,” March 25, 2008 2
(l)   DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
      Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended




1
  Copies are available to authorized users at:
https://osdext.osd.mil/sites/ousdi/j_cws/Shared%20Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx
2
  Copies are available to authorized users at: https://usdi.dtic.mil/usdi_docs/keyref/usdi_keyref.cfm


Change 2, 09/24/2020                                      4                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                      DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                        RESPONSIBILITES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY
(USD(I&S)). The USD(I&S) shall:

    a. Pursuant to Reference (b), exercise the Secretary of Defense’s authority, direction, and
control over the Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities that are intelligence components and
that conduct MASINT activities; exercise planning, policy, and strategic oversight over all DoD
MASINT policy, plans, and programs.

   b. Exercise the direction and control and provide for the fiscal management of the DoD
MASINT mission under the Military Intelligence Program (MIP), in accordance with Executive
Order 12333 (Reference (f)).

    c. Exercise planning and policy oversight of human capital so that MASINT activities are
manned, trained, equipped, and structured by the Military Departments to support national
requirements and DoD missions and to fully satisfy the needs of the President, the National Security
Council, the Intelligence Community (IC), and the Combatant Commands.

   d. Coordinate, assess, and deconflict MASINT-related MIP requirements in association with
National Intelligence Program (NIP) requirements.

    e. With the assistance of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director, Defense
Intelligence Operations Coordination Center (DIOCC), evaluate DoD MASINT plans and programs
for adequacy and responsiveness in support of intelligence planning and provide direction and
guidance to DoD Components conducting MASINT activities.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). The Director, DIA, in addition
to the responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure and under the authority, direction, and control
of the USD(I&S), shall:

    a. Serve as the DoD MASINT Manager. Advise the Secretary of Defense, the USD(I&S),
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Combatant Commanders on MASINT issues.

   b. Establish, lead, and operate a unified, effective, and efficient defense intelligence
community for MASINT activities.

    c. Manage DIA MASINT activities in accordance with Reference (c), DoDD 5240.01
(Reference (g)), and DoDD 5250.01 (Reference (h)), including research and development to
support the transition of successful technology demonstrations into advanced development,
fielding, and operations.




Change 2, 09/24/2020                              5                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


    d. Submit a nomination for National MASINT Committee (MASCOM) Chair for DNI or
designee approval. Assign personnel and provide administrative support to the MASCOM.

    e. Invest in MASINT-related research, development, training, technical demonstration
activities, and acquisition consistent with guidance, within resource limitations, and in
coordination with appropriate DoD Components, with the goal of transitioning successful
technology developments into advanced development, fielding, and use.

   f. Foster MASINT support to forensics, biometrics, and identity management activities.

   g. Support MASINT collection requirements and operations.

   h. As the Defense Human Intelligence (HUMINT) Manager, develop, coordinate, and
provide integrated HUMINT support to MASINT and MASINT-related activities, as needed.

   i. Establish, manage, and resource the National MASINT Management Office (NMMO),
consistent with DNI Memorandum (Reference (i)), as appropriate, the director of which shall:

       (1) Provide the means and mechanisms necessary to assist the Director, DIA, in leading
the Defense MASINT community as a fully integrated enterprise.

       (2) Serve as the principal MASINT advisor to the Director, DIA, the DIOCC, and the
National Intelligence Coordination Center.

       (3) Manage, direct, program, plan, and oversee the U.S. MASINT System (USMS) for
the Department of Defense, as appropriate, that will:

           (a) Develop and maintain the MASINT Portal, and other follow-on tools as
appropriate, to provide a central means of discovery for federated dissemination of MASINT
products.

           (b) Develop an end-to-end MASINT enterprise architecture to ensure an enterprise
approach to the entire MASINT discipline.

            (c) Prescribe and mandate MASINT standards to ensure interoperability; validate the
integration of standards and architectures into the USMS; and support information sharing,
advanced data-mining, and IC access to MASINT products, data, tools, and signatures.

            (d) Develop and maintain the National MASINT Requirements System and future
evolved systems to facilitate management of MASINT requirements receipt, registration,
validation, tasking, tracking, and user satisfaction.

            (e) Develop and maintain the National MASINT Data Broker and other future
evolved tools to facilitate information sharing and data-mining throughout the MASINT
enterprise.




Change 2, 09/24/2020                           6                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


          (f) Guide the National Consortium for MASINT Research (NCMR) to foster research
and development of new technologies from academia, industry, and the national laboratories.

            (g) Foster MASINT research and development and technical demonstration activities
within guidance and resource limitations, building upon the innovations developed in the NCMR
and elsewhere. The goal is to find, develop, and demonstrate successful technologies and
transition them into the larger MASINT enterprise, to include the USMS, for advanced
development, fielding, and use.

            (h) Foster MASINT support for geospatial intelligence (GEOINT) and signals
intelligence (SIGINT) activities.

           (i) Facilitate the advocacy, coordination, and satisfaction of MASINT threat
signature data needs to support the DoD and IC signatures organizational structures developed in
response to Reference (h).

            (j) Develop consistent and coordinated MASINT policy implementing guidance for
the USMS, including but not limited to MASINT classification and foreign disclosure and
release; ensure uniform alignment and implementation with the IC and with allied partners.

           (k) Leverage non-intelligence DoD sensor systems to accomplish MASINT
objectives and meet requirements.

           (l) Ensure the technical adequacy of MASINT training, including issuance and
oversight of policies, standards, certifications, and procedures.

            (m) Oversee and review military and civilian MASINT career development,
certification, and training programs in the manner prescribed in DoDI 3305.16 (Reference (j)).

           (n) Provide program management and execution advice on MASINT resources
within the General Defense Intelligence Program and the MIP.

           (o) Within established channels, provide outreach to Congress, the Department of
Defense, the IC, and other MASINT customers through MASINT liaison officers and other
subject matter experts. Inform various forums, processes, and organizations on current and
future MASINT capabilities.

        (4) Establish and provide Executive Secretariat support for a MASINT Board of
Governors to provide senior, cross-community advice to the Director, DIA, in his or her capacity
as the Defense MASINT Manager.

        (5) Evaluate MASINT plans and programs for adequacy and responsiveness in support
of MASINT requirements, and make recommendations to USD(I&S) in support of the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director, DIA; and the Director, DIOCC.




Change 2, 09/24/2020                           7                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


      (6) Standardize MASINT-specific equipment, processes, and facilities, and eliminate
unwarranted efforts, in coordination with DoD Components.

      (7) Coordinate and support, as appropriate, MASINT activities across the Department of
Defense.

       (8) Utilize, when available, foreign government-derived MASINT or MASINT-related
data and services necessary for SIGINT and GEOINT and their related applications.

        (9) Foster sharing of MASINT with foreign partners and governments, consistent with
policy, constraints, and restrictions.

   j. As Director, DIOCC:

     (1) Provide departmental validation of MASINT requirements received from DoD
Components.

          (2) Monitor and track the status of DoD MASINT requirements.

          (3) Contribute to IC and DoD assessments on the performance of MASINT activities.

          (4) Provide representation to the National MASINT Committee, sub-committees, and
boards.

       (5) Maintain continuous, integrated MASINT representation in the DIOCC to monitor
and report status and disposition of MASINT sensors, platforms, and operations.


3. DIRECTOR, NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (NSA). The Director, NSA, in addition to
the responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure and under the authority, direction, and control of
the USD(I&S), shall:

   a. Support MASINT collection and data requirements that require SIGINT systems action.

   b. Develop and provide SIGINT support to MASINT or MASINT-related activities and
operations, consistent with law, directives, policies, constraints, and other restrictions.

    c. Evaluate SIGINT plans, programs, and activities that support MASINT or MASINT-
related activities for adequacy and responsiveness in support of intelligence needs, and make
recommendations to USD(I&S) as appropriate and in coordination with the Director, DIA.

    d. To the greatest extent practicable, ensure SIGINT standards and end-to-end SIGINT
technical architectures are interoperable with MASINT.

   e. Utilize, when appropriate, foreign government-derived SIGINT or SIGINT-related data
and services necessary for MASINT and MASINT-related applications.



Change 2, 09/24/2020                              8                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009



    f. In coordination with NMMO, foster sharing of SIGINT-derived MASINT with foreign
partners and governments, consistent with policy, constraints, and restrictions.


4. DIRECTOR, NATIONAL GEOSPATIAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (NGA). The
Director, NGA, in addition to the responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure and under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), shall:

   a. Support MASINT collection and data requirements that require GEOINT systems action.

   b. Coordinate with the Director, DIA, to develop and provide integrated support to MASINT
and MASINT-related activities, as needed.

   c. Coordinate with the Director, DIA, to provide interoperability between the National
System for Geospatial Intelligence and the USMS architectures in support of intelligence
objectives.

   d. Provide GEOINT support to MASINT or MASINT-related activities outside the
Department of Defense to include, but not limited to, national and civil activities.

    e. Evaluate GEOINT plans, programs, and activities that support MASINT or MASINT-
related activities for adequacy and responsiveness in support of intelligence needs, and make
recommendations to USD(I&S), as appropriate, in coordination with the Director, DIA.

    f. In coordination with Director, DIA, foster sharing of joint GEOINT-MASINT products
and data with foreign partners and governments, consistent with policy, constraints, and
restrictions.


5. DIRECTOR, NATIONAL RECONNAISSANCE OFFICE (NRO). The Director, NRO, in
addition to the responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure and under the authority, direction,
and control of the USD(I&S), shall:

    a. Establish policies for the acquisition of national space-based MASINT systems in
coordination with the DNI; the USD(I&S); Director, DIA; the Secretaries of Military
Departments; the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and others, as appropriate. Major
systems acquisitions that are majority-funded by the NIP shall be executed in accordance with
the Memorandum of Agreement between DNI and the Secretary of Defense (Reference (k)).

   b. Research, develop, acquire, launch, and maintain the operational capability of national
space-based MASINT collection systems to meet DoD and IC requirements. Maintaining
operational capability includes command and control of platforms and other systems required to
enable space-based MASINT intelligence collection, processing, and dissemination.




Change 2, 09/24/2020                              9                          ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


    c. Provide architectural-related recommendations to the USD(I&S); Director, DIA; and DNI
for mission decisions in relation to space-based MASINT systems architecture.


6. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L), in accordance with DoDD 5134.01 (Reference
(l)) shall:

     a. Establish policies for the acquisition of MASINT systems (except national space-based
systems) in coordination with the DNI; USD(I&S); Director, DIA; Secretaries of the Military
Departments; Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and others, as appropriate. Major systems
acquisitions that are majority-funded by the NIP shall be executed in accordance with Reference
(k).

   b. Develop and maintain a DoD science and technology investment strategy to support the
development, acquisition, and integration of technological advances in national and DoD
MASINT systems and platforms managed by the Military Departments.


7. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. The General Counsel of
the Department of Defense shall provide legal advice and assistance to the Secretary of Defense;
USD(I&S); Director, DIA; and other DoD officials on MASINT activities, and as appropriate, in
conjunction with the Attorney General.


8. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall assign
responsibilities and establish procedures, as appropriate, within their organizations to implement
this Instruction.


9. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure, shall:

  a. Designate an organizational entity within their respective Military Service as the Service
MASINT focal point for all Service-related MASINT activities. Each Service element shall:

        (1) Develop plans, programs, budgets, policy, doctrine, tactics, techniques, procedures,
and lessons-learned relating to Service-specific MASINT activities and coordinate MASINT
policy within the Service and with oversight organizations.

        (2) Facilitate MASINT federation and integration by orchestrating Service MASINT
tasking, collection, processing, production, exploitation, and dissemination functions as well as
federated production and capability development. Implement Service MASINT plans, programs,
budgets, policy, doctrine, tactics, techniques, procedures, and system requirement in organizing,
training, and equipping Service-specific MASINT capabilities and forces.




Change 2, 09/24/2020                            10                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


       (3) Assist DIA, NMMO, NRO, and others in conducting research and development to
meet U.S. MASINT needs by coordinating MASINT requirements with the MASINT
community and accomplishing specified research and development tasks within approved
programs in accordance with DoD guidance and direction.

       (4) Program and/or provide military personnel to perform MASINT missions in
accordance with approved requirements and procedures.

    b. Conduct or oversee respective Military Service MASINT activities, training, and
operations in support of Service specific activities and Combatant Commands, as appropriate,
through respective Military Services’ MASINT training organizations and programs.

    c. Operate and maintain MASINT facilities, platforms, sensors, and resources to conduct and
support MASINT operations (with the exception of national space-based systems) as authorized
and directed by the Secretary of Defense and USD(I&S), including military Reserve programs to
meet emergency or wartime requirements for MASINT resources. Provide Director, DIA, with
data from non-intelligence DoD sensor systems to assist in meeting MASINT requirements.

    d. Submit MASINT information requirements to DIA, while simultaneously providing
information copies to the National MASINT Committee.

    e. Ensure their respective Military Service-managed space-based MASINT collection
systems are researched, developed, acquired, launched, maintained, and operated to meet DoD
and IC requirements. Maintaining operational capability includes command and control of
platforms and other systems required to enable space-based MASINT intelligence collection,
processing, and dissemination.


10. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, in addition to the responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure, shall:

    a. Monitor the responsiveness of MASINT systems to military requirements and make
recommendations regarding overall effectiveness to the Secretary of Defense.

    b. Respond to, coordinate, and allocate resources to Combatant Commander requests for
military-operated USMS platforms, units, or other assets.

    c. Validate USMS systems and platform requirements through appropriate DoD and Joint
Staff processes.

   d. Develop and maintain joint doctrine for core, supporting, and related MASINT
capabilities in joint operations.




Change 2, 09/24/2020                          11                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 5105.58, April 22, 2009


11. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, in addition to the responsibilities in section 8 of this enclosure and, as
appropriate, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:

   a. Integrate, plan, and execute MASINT operations in support of intelligence planning,
approved plans, and operations that have been directed by the Joint Staff.

   b. Submit MASINT information requirements to DIA, simultaneously providing information
copies to the National MASINT Committee.

    c. Exercise operational control of military platforms, units, or other warfighter assets that
have a MASINT capability in accordance with established procedures, taking into consideration
other MASINT advisory and supplemental tasking, as appropriate. Provide the Director, DIA,
with data from non-intelligence DoD sensor systems to assist in meeting MASINT requirements.

   d. Apprise the Secretary of Defense, USD(I&S), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and
Director, DIA, of the operational status of all allocated MASINT resources.




Change 2, 09/24/2020                           12                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                                 DoDI 5105.58


                                             GLOSSARY


                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


DIA                Defense Intelligence Agency
DIOCC              Defense Intelligence Operations Coordination Center
DNI                Director of National Intelligence
DoDD               DoD directive

GEOINT             geospatial intelligence

HUMINT             human intelligence

IC                 Intelligence Community

MASCOM             National Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT) Committee
MASINT             measurement and signature intelligence
MIP                Military Intelligence Program

NCMR               National Consortium for Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT)
                   Research
NGA                National Geospatial Intelligence Agency
NIP                National Intelligence Program
NSA                National Security Agency
NMMO               National Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT) Management
                   Office
NRO                National Reconnaissance Office

SIGINT             signals intelligence

USD(AT&L)          Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I&S)           Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
USMS               United States Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT) System


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

Board of Governors. A senior-level IC body, chaired by the Director, DIA, and charged to
formulate guidance for the future direction of the MASINT enterprise, achieve unity of purpose,
establish a common vision, and address issues of mutual concern to the MASINT enterprise and
its stakeholders.




Change 2, 09/24/2020                             13                          GLOSSARY
                                                                                   DoDI 5105.58


General Defense Intelligence Program. The Defense component of the NIP and the vehicle for
bringing the national and defense intelligence capabilities to bear on DoD issues.

MASINT. Information produced by quantitative and qualitative analysis of physical attributes of
targets and events to characterize, locate, and identify them. MASINT exploits a variety of
phenomenologies to support signature development and analysis, to perform technical analysis,
and to detect, characterize, locate, and identify targets and events. MASINT is derived from
specialized, technically-derived measurements of physical phenomenon intrinsic to an object or
event and it includes the use of quantitative signatures to interpret the data.

MASINT community. The collaborative confederation of various IC organizations, agencies,
and entities performing MASINT management, collection, processing, analysis, and/or
production activities, and including some consumers of MASINT.

MIP. Programs, projects, or activities that support USD(I&S) intelligence responsibilities and
provide capabilities to better meet warfighters’ operational requirements, as outlined in
Reference (b).

NCMR. A research and development program designed to focus nationwide researchers on
scientific and technological areas that will enhance existing MASINT capabilities or introduce
new ones. Projects incubated in the NCMR are transitioned to other USMS, DoD, and national
MASINT organizations for further application-specific development and fielding.

NIP. All programs, projects, and activities of the IC, as well as any other programs of the IC
designated jointly by the NIP Director and the head of a U.S. department or agency or by the
President. This does not include programs, projects, or activities of the Military Departments to
acquire intelligence solely for the planning and conduct of tactical military operations by the
U.S. Armed Forces.

MASCOM. The DoD and IC sounding board for MASINT issues. MASCOM advises the
USD(I&S) and DNI on the status and strategic direction for U.S. MASINT capabilities. The
National MASINT Requirements Subcommittee of MASCOM validates and prioritizes
MASINT collection requirements for the Department of Defense and IC.

NMMO. A joint organization, subordinate to the Director, DIA, that manages and executes, on
behalf of the Department of Defense and IC, the MASINT Services of common concern and
other MASINT-related activities. NMMO provides the means and mechanisms to assist the
Director, DIA, in leading the decentralized MASINT community as a fully integrated enterprise.

National MASINT Requirements System. A Web-based collection management application that
supports the creation and submission of MASINT requirements and tracking of user satisfaction.

USMS. The combination of technology, policies, capabilities, doctrine, activities, people, data,
and communities necessary to produce MASINT in an integrated multi-intelligence, multi-
domain environment. The USMS includes the IC, the Joint Staff, the Military Departments (to
include the Services), the Combatant Commands, and selected international and civil partners.



Change 2, 09/24/2020                           14                            GLOSSARY
                                                                                 DoDI 5105.58


The USMS is a network-centric system-of-systems that provides the framework for tasking,
collection, processing, exploitation and dissemination and research and development activities
that support varied intelligence solutions for the national policymakers and the DoD community.




Change 2, 09/24/2020                          15                           GLOSSARY
