                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 5500.16
                                                                              February 15, 2013
                                                 Incorporating Change 1, Effective May 15, 2018

                                                                                    USD(C)/CFO

SUBJECT:      Relationship With the Surveys and Investigations (S&I) Staff, House
              Appropriations Committee

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5118.03 (Reference
(a)), this instruction reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5500.16 (Reference (b)) to establish policy,
assign responsibilities, and prescribe procedures governing the relationship of the Department of
Defense with the S&I Staff, House Appropriations Committee (HAC).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of
the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (referred to
collectively in this instruction as “the DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to make such administrative arrangements as are necessary to
facilitate the conduct of inquiries by the HAC S&I Staff.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.
                                                          DoDI 5500.16, February 15, 2013


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective February 15, 2013.




                                             Robert F. Hale
                                             Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/
                                             Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




Change 1, 05/15/2018                        2
                                                              DoDI 5500.16, February 15, 2013


                                        ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5118.03, “Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial
      Officer, Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO),” April 20, 2012
(b)   DoD Instruction 5500.16, “Relationship with the Surveys and Investigations (S&I) Staff,
      House Appropriations Committee,” October 21, 1996 (hereby cancelled)
(c)   Section 72a of Title 2, United States Code
(d)   DoD Directive 5205.07, “Special Access Program (SAP) Policy,” July 1, 2010
(e)   DoD Instruction 5400.04, “Provision of Information to Congress,” March 17, 2009
(f)   DoD Manual 5200.01, “DoD Information Security Program,” dates vary by volume
(g)   Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-11, “Preparation, Submission, and
      Execution of the Budget,” current edition
(h)   DoD Instruction 7650.01, “Government Accountability Office (GAO) and Comptroller
      General Requests for Access to Records,” January 27, 2009, as amended




Change 1, 05/15/2018                        3                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDI 5500.16, February 15, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (USD(C)/CFO). In addition to the responsibilities in section 2
of this enclosure and as the principal staff advisor to the Secretary of Defense for budgeting,
auditing, and fiscal functions in accordance with Reference (a), the USD(C)/CFO:

   a. Establishes administrative procedures and guidance covering the relationship of the DoD
Components with the S&I Staff, serves as the principal DoD liaison to the S&I Staff, and makes
such arrangements as are necessary to facilitate the conduct of S&I Staff inquiries.

    b. Through the Deputy Comptroller (Budget and Appropriations Affairs) and the Office of
the Deputy Comptroller (Program/Budget), coordinates matters related to S&I Staff inquiries
with the appropriate OSD and DoD Components and directs S&I staff members who are
conducting inquiries to the appropriate DoD points of contact.


2. OSD COMPONENT HEADS AND THE CJCS. The OSD Component heads and the CJCS
will pursue DoD-wide coordination of inquiries involving their respective functional areas.
When notification of an impending inquiry has been received from the Deputy Comptroller
(Budget and Appropriations Affairs), each principal staff assistant to the Secretary of Defense or
Joint Staff Director affected by the inquiry will designate and advise the Deputy Comptroller
(Budget and Appropriations Affairs) of the office within that organization and the individual
who will serve as the OSD or CJCS Staff Coordinator (referred to in this instruction as “Staff
Coordinator”) for that particular inquiry.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND THE DIRECTORS OF
DEFENSE AGENCIES. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Directors of
Defense Agencies will make all arrangements necessary for S&I staff teams to conduct inquiries
within their respective component. These arrangements will include, but not be limited to:

   a. The designation of an office to receive all notifications of impending inquiries.

     b. Assignment of responsibility to a specific individual within the Military Department or
Defense Agency for dealing with the S&I Staff and with the Staff Coordinator on each inquiry as
it is announced.

   c. Advising the Deputy Comptroller (Budget and Appropriations Affairs) and the Staff
Coordinator, as appropriate, of individuals the S&I Staff may contact.




Change 1, 05/15/2018                         4                              ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 5500.16, February 15, 2013


4. THE DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON HEADQUARTERS SERVICES (WHS) AND THE
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS (ASD(LA)). At
the request of the Deputy Comptroller (Budget and Appropriations Affairs), the Director, WHS,
under the authority, direction and control of the Director of Administration and Management,
and the ASD(LA) will review the active DoD security clearances of S&I investigators and
provide results to the Deputy Comptroller.




Change 1, 05/15/2018                       5                            ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 5500.16, February 15, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. GENERAL. Pursuant to section 72a of Title 2, United States Code (Reference (c)), the S&I
Staff conducts investigations of the organization and operation of Executive Branch agencies to
assist the HAC in actions under its jurisdiction. The S&I Staff reports directly to the HAC Chair.
It is completely separate from committee staffs that deal individually with agency budget
requests.


2. INITIATION OF INQUIRIES

    a. Inquiries are initiated by majority vote of a subcommittee of the HAC, with participation
by both the subcommittee chair and the ranking minority member. Upon approval of the chair
and ranking minority member of the HAC, the inquiry is directed to the S&I Staff for action.

   b. The Chief, HAC S&I Staff, advises the Secretary of Defense by letter of the impending
inquiry. An information copy of the letter is provided to the ASD(LA).


3. ASSIGNMENT OF INQUIRIES

   a. Following notification from the Chief, HAC S&I Staff, the Deputy Comptroller (Budget
and Appropriations Affairs) will:

         (1) Determine the OSD Component of primary responsibility and request that an
individual from that Component be designated as Staff Coordinator. If the subject of the inquiry
is in a functional area under the jurisdiction of the CJCS, the CJCS designates the individual who
will serve as Staff Coordinator for that particular inquiry.

      (2) Forward the name of the individual designated as Staff Coordinator to the S&I Staff.
Henceforth, the Staff Coordinator will be the principal coordinator between the S&I team and the
Department of Defense for the conduct of that particular inquiry.

        (3) Inform the designated representative or central coordinating office within a Military
Department whenever an inquiry is expected to involve its operations. Each Defense Agency
will also be advised of each inquiry in which it has an interest. The Military Department or
Defense Agency then designates a principal coordinator within that organization for matters
about the inquiry. Such individuals normally will be from the same functional area as the Staff
Coordinator.

       (4) Notify the Chief, HAC S&I Staff, of the names of DoD individuals who are to be
contacted to get the inquiry underway.




Change 1, 05/15/2018                         6                              ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 5500.16, February 15, 2013


    b. The Deputy Comptroller (Budget and Appropriations Affairs), upon receipt from the S&I
Staff of a list of its investigators who will be participating in an inquiry, forwards the list to the
ASD(LA) or Director, WHS, as appropriate. Once the ASD(LA) or Director, WHS, has
confirmed the active DoD security clearance of each investigator, the Deputy Comptroller
provides a list of investigators and their active DoD security clearance to the Staff Coordinator,
the affected Military Department central coordinating offices, and any Defense Agency that may
be involved in the inquiry.


4. CONDUCTING INQUIRIES

  a. DoD personnel are notified, in advance, of the active DoD security clearances of S&I staff
members assigned to an inquiry.

   b. The DoD will control the availability of special access material to the S&I Staff, in
accordance with established procedure and DoDD 5205.07 (Reference (e)).

        (1) A request for S&I Staff access to DoD Special Access Program (SAP) information
must be submitted to the Director, Special Programs, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense
for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. This request must be approved by the chair or
ranking member of the HAC subcommittee that has oversight for the program in question (in
cases of administrative urgency, the S&I Staff Director’s or designated senior minority staff
member’s signature can be accepted). The request must include justification for the requested
access, the duration of the requested access, and necessary security data on the investigators for
which the access is requested.

        (2) The Director, Special Programs, evaluates the request and notifies the appropriate
SAP Central Office within OSD, the Office of the CJCS, or the Military Departments to process
the request.

    c. The Deputy Comptroller (Budget and Appropriations Affairs) will customarily receive an
investigator’s travel itinerary before that investigator visits DoD facilities or requests
information. The Staff Coordinator will take the lead in making arrangements and arrange for
travel and appointment schedules with Military Department coordinators or with other DoD
offices.

    d. When the S&I staff team requests information or data from DoD, the Staff Coordinator
obtains such information or data. This will enable the Staff Coordinator to be knowledgeable of
the material being requested and prevent unnecessary administrative delays in obtaining the
information or data. The Staff Coordinator requests that the S&I staff team advise them on any
unresolved problems that may arise in the conduct of the inquiry. All possible steps will be
taken to ensure that S&I staff members receive the full cooperation of DoD organizations in
conducting the inquiry.




Change 1, 05/15/2018                           7                               ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 5500.16, February 15, 2013


    e. S&I staff teams normally visit DoD installations unaccompanied. The OSD staff, Joint
Staff, Military Departments, or Defense Agencies coordinators will not arrange for DoD officials
to accompany S&I teams, except in unusual circumstances, or at the S&I team chief’s request.

   f. Information and data will be provided to S&I staff members in accordance with DoDI
5400.04 (Reference (e)). Maximum cooperation and all needed information will be provided to
S&I staff members in the conduct of their inquiries, subject to the following conditions:

       (1) Classified information that is pertinent to the subject of the inquiry must be properly
safeguarded and provided in accordance with DoD Manual 5200.01 (Reference (f)).

        (2) Information that is in draft form (e.g., pre-decisional information that has not been
reviewed, coordinated, or approved by the Secretary of Defense or a representative) will not be
released. Information in this category generally consists of draft policies, studies, or analyses
that have not been fully coordinated within the Department of Defense and, as such, do not
reflect a position to which the Secretary of Defense or the Department of Defense can be held
accountable.

       (3) Budget estimates and supporting materials for any given fiscal year, with the
exception of internal DoD planning and budgeting documents like Program Budget Decisions
and Program Decision Memorandums, will be made available upon transmittal of the President’s
Budget for that year to the Congress. Thereafter, any other material provided to the
Appropriations Committees may be furnished. Office of Management and Budget Circular No.
A-11 (Reference (g)) establishes the policies on premature disclosure of Presidential
recommendations.

        (4) DoDI 7650.01 (Reference (h)) governs the release of out-year financial planning
data.

        (5) Requests for information, in any form, that is under the joint or exclusive cognizance
of another Executive Branch agency (i.e., intelligence information under the cognizance of the
Director of Central Intelligence) will be referred to that agency for review and approval of
release.


5. RESTRICTION OF DATA RELEASE. The conditions cited in paragraph 4f of this
enclosure that prevent the provision of data to S&I staff members should arise infrequently.
When such conditions do occur, DoD personnel will make every possible effort to discover some
alternate means to satisfy requests for data acceptable to the S&I Staff and the Department of
Defense. In those cases where requests for data cannot be satisfied, there will be no disclosure of
material, except in accordance with the procedures in Enclosure 4 of Reference (e).




Change 1, 05/15/2018                         8                              ENCLOSURE 3
                                                             DoDI 5500.16, February 15, 2013


                                        GLOSSARY

                           ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(LA)        Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs

CJCS           Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DoDD           DoD Directive
DoDI           DoD Instruction

HAC            House Appropriations Committee

SAP            Special Access Program
S&I            Surveys and Investigations

USD(C)/CFO Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer of the
           Department of Defense

WHS            Washington Headquarters Services




Change 1, 05/15/2018                        9                              GLOSSARY
