Ps Om D
Sir epartment of Defense
Ds” P
Sey INSTRUCTION
NUMBER 3608.11
November 4, 2005
ee aera eee ener ee a
USD(D
SUBJECT: Information Operations Career Force
References: (a) Information Operations Roadmap, October 30, 2003!
(b) Sections 3013(b), 5013(b), and 8013(b), title 10, United States Code
1. PURPOSE
This Instruction:

1.1. Establishes policy guidance, definitions, and responsibilities for the Information
Operations (IO) Career Force.

1.2. Authorizes the publication of implementing DoD issuances on the IO Career Force; and
directs the establishment of IO professional development boards in each Military Service as
authorized by reference (a).

2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military
Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities,
and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”). The term “Military Service” as used herein, refers to the
Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.

3. DEFINITIONS

3.1. Functional Proponent. The OSD Principal Staff Assistant responsible for policy and
oversight of a particular functional area.

* This classified document may be obtained from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Resources and Plans.

DoDI 3608.11, November 4, 2005

3.2. Information Operations (IO). The integrated employment of the core capabilities of
Electronic Warfare (EW), Computer Network Operations (CNO), Psychological Operations
(PSYOP), Military Deception (MILDEC), and Operations Security (OPSEC), in concert with
specified supporting and related capabilities, to influence, disrupt, corrupt or usurp adversarial
human and automated decision-making while protecting our own.

3.3. IO Capability Specialist. A functional expert in one or more of the specialized IO core
capabilities of EW, CNO, PSYOP, MILDEC, and OPSEC. They serve primarily in their specialty
area(s), but also may serve as IO Planners after receiving IO Planner training.

3.4. IO Career Force. The military professionals that perform and integrate the core IO
capabilities of EW, CNO, PSYOP, MILDEC, and OPSEC. The IO Career Force consists of IO
Capability Specialists and IO Planners.

3.5. IO Planner. A functional expert trained and qualified to plan and execute full spectrum
JO. They usually serve one or more tours as an IO capability specialist prior to assignment as an
IO planner and may hold non-IO positions throughout their careers.

3.6. Operational Advocate. The Commander of a Combatant Command responsible for
advocating a particular functional area on behalf of the Combatant Commands.

4. POLICY
It is DoD policy that:

4.1. An IO Career Force shall be established and maintained to plan and execute fully
integrated IO. The IO Career Force, comprised of Active and Reserve component military
personnel, shall consist of two categories: IO Planners and IO Capability Specialists. Guidance
for enlisted and civilian personnel may be provided in future revisions of this Instruction.

4.2. Mandatory and desired education, training, and experience standards for each IO career
category shall be established based on the level of complexity of the duties performed by
personnel in each category. These standards shall provide a DoD-wide, common foundation of
knowledge necessary to enable the IO Career Force to be fully proficient in IO. Progress on this
task shall be included in the annual report to the Secretary of Defense on the status of the IO
Career Force.

4.3. Personnel in the IO Career Force shall be assigned for sufficient tour length durations,
according to Service assignment policies, to provide continuity of IO expertise to the organization.
General/Flag officers shall normally be assigned to Joint IO positions within an organization for
not less than 2 years. General/Flag officers assigned to non-joint IO positions shall normally be
assigned for not less than 3 years.

4.4. The DoD Components shall develop and implement a process to uniquely identify, in the
appropriate personnel systems, a baseline list of Joint and Military Service IO positions. Joint-
duty IO positions shall be allocated to the Military Services in accordance with DoD policy.

2

=
DoD! 3608.11, November 4, 2005
4.5. Professional development boards in each Military Service shall be supplemented or
established to advise the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) and Commander,
United States Strategic Command on the management of accession, training, education, and career
development for the IO Career Force.
4.6. Accession, retention, and promotion rates within the IO Career Force shall be maintained
on par with the averages for the Military Service, such that Joint requirements are satisfied.
5. RESPONSIBILITIES
5.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence shall:
5.1.1. Serve as the OSD functional proponent for the IO Career Force.
5.1.1.1. Exercise overall responsibility for policies and procedures governing the IO
Career Force.
5.1.1.2. Coordinate with USD(P&R) on the annual report to the Secretary of Defense
on the status of the IO Career Force.
5.1.1.3. Monitor the accession, retention, and promotion rates of the IO Career Force
in coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness CUUSD(P&R))
and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as required.

5.1.2. Issue appropriate DoD guidance for implementing this Instruction.

5.1.3. Ensure skill requirements for military personnel in Joint or other DoD Component
billets are identified in terms of education, training, and experience necessary for career
progression to the most senior IO positions (e.g., General Officer, Flag Officer).

5.1.4. Coordinate periodic reviews of IO manpower requirements with the Heads of the
DoD Components.

5.2. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness shall:

5.2.1. Monitor the accession, retention, and promotion rates of the IO Career Force in
coordination with USD(]) and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and prepare an analysis of the
findings in an annual report to the Secretary of Defense, as required.

5.2.2. Develop military training policy and oversee IO Career Force operational training.

5.3. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

5.3.1. Identify billets in Joint manpower documents that require the unique skills of IO

Planners or IO Capability Specialists, and identify the training that is required for each position.
3

DoDI 3608.11, November 4, 2005

5.3.2. Formulate and coordinate policies for Joint training and education of the IO Career
Force.

5.3.3. Monitor the accession, retention, and promotion rates of the IO Career Force in
coordination with USD() and USD(P&R), as required.

5.3.4. Include IO standards in the Officer Professional Military Education program and
monitor Service and Joint schools to ensure compliance with such standards.

5.4. The Commander, United States Strategic Command shall serve as the operational
advocate for the IO Career Force.
5.5. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

5.5.1. Develop IO doctrine and tactics and organize, train, and equip for IO within their
respective areas of responsibility pursuant to Sections 3013(b), 5013(b), and 8013(b) of title 10,
United States Code (reference (c)).

5.5.2. Establish an IO Career Force and ensure assignment of its members to appropriate
IO positions.

5.5.2.1. Identify billets in Joint and Service manpower documents that require the
unique skills of IO Planners or IO Capability Specialists.

5.5.2.2. Identify the military officers that fulfill the criteria for IO Planners or IO
Capability Specialists.

5.5.2.3. Identify personnel comprising the initial IO Career Force who possess the
requisite prior training, education and experience as IO planners and/or capability specialists, by
appropriate entries in individual records and in coordination with USD(I) and USD(P&R).

5.5.3. Establish or supplement current professional development boards, as required, to
advise USD(]) and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff concerning the management of
accession, training, education, and career development of the Component’s IO Career Force.

5.5.4. Develop and implement procedures that provide appropriate education, training, and
career development opportunities for members of the IO Career Force.

6. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Instruction is effective immediately.
Stephen A. Cambone ,
; 4
