                             Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 1340.18
                                                                            September 11, 2012
                                                Incorporating Change 1, Effective April 20, 2020

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:      Advance Pay Incident to a Permanent Change of Station (PCS) for Members of the
              Uniformed Services

References: (a) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
            (b) DoD Instruction 1340.18, “Advance Pay Incident to a Permanent Change of
                Station (PCS) for Members of the Uniformed Services,” December 13, 1988
                (hereby cancelled)
            (c) Section 1006 of chapter 19, title 37, United States Code
            (d) Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1, “Uniformed Service Members,”
                current edition
            (e) DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation
                (FMRs),” current edition


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in Reference (a), this Instruction reissues
Reference (b) to establish policy, assign responsibilities, and prescribe procedures governing the
administration of an advance of basic pay incident to a PCS as authorized by Reference (c).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a service in the Department of Homeland Security
by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the Department
of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities
in the DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:
                                                             DoDI 1340.18, September 11, 2012


    a. Service members may receive an advance of basic pay incident to a PCS to meet the
extraordinary expenses of a Government-ordered relocation if the incurred or anticipated
expenses exceed those covered by the advances or reimbursements in subparagraphs 4.a.(1)
through 4.a.(4), if used, or are outside the scope of those entitlements.

       (1) Service member and dependent travel allowances and per diem.

       (2) Overseas housing allowance.

       (3) Basic allowance for housing.

       (4) Dislocation allowance.

    b. An advance of basic pay may be used to assist Service members with out-of-pocket
expenses that exceed or precede reimbursements incurred during a duty location change, which
are not typical of day-to-day military living.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy (DASD(MPP)). The
DASD(MPP), under the authority, direction, and control of the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Readiness and Force Management, shall:

       (1) Serve as the focal point on matters for advance of basic pay incident to a PCS.

       (2) Develop and maintain policy and procedures whereby Service members may request
and receive an advance of pay incident to a PCS.

       (3) Consider request for changes to criteria in this Instruction and approve such changes.

   b. Secretaries of the Military Departments and Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard. The
Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard shall:

       (1) Require that forms documenting Service member use of an advance of pay are
maintained in accordance with Military Service regulations.

       (2) Designate individuals authorized to approve requests for advance payments incident
to a PCS.

       (3) Comply with this Instruction and update Service instructions and regulations
accordingly within 120 days of the effective date on this Instruction.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure.



                                                2
Change 1, 04/20/2020
                                                                DoDI 1340.18, September 11, 2012



7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance updates references and removes
expiration language in accordance with current Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense
direction.



9. EFFECTIVE DATE This Instruction is effective September 11, 2012.




                                                  Erin C. Conaton
                                                  Under Secretary of Defense for
                                                      Personnel and Readiness

Enclosure
   Procedures
Glossary




                                                 3
Change 1, 04/20/2020
                                                              DoDI 1340.18, September 11, 2012


                                           ENCLOSURE

                                          PROCEDURES


1. REQUESTING ADVANCE OF PAY

    a. All Service members requesting an advance of pay in accordance with a PCS are required
to sign a DD Form 2560, “Advance Pay Certification/Authorization,” or submit a Service-
specific automated request that states the purpose of the program and confirms the intended use
of the funds is in accordance with the stated purpose.

   b. Justification is required when the Service member requests an advance outside of the
normal parameters. Justification must illustrate extenuating circumstances, severe hardship, or
unusually large expenses that require an extension of the normal parameters and shall be
provided in writing to the commander when:

        (1) A Service member requests an advance of greater than 1 month’s basic pay, less
deductions. When warranted and justified by the out-of-pocket expenses experienced or
anticipated, a commander may approve up to 3 month’s basic pay, less deductions. Justification
must clearly indicate out-of-pocket PCS expenses that meet the amount of advance requested,
including:

            (a) A list of actual or anticipated expenses.

           (b) An explanation of individual circumstances when greater than normal expenses
might be incurred, such as a new residence search; supporting two households when the Service
member is unable to rent or sell the house at the old duty station; the down payment on purchase
of a house; or excess household goods shipment charges.

        (2) A Service member requests a repayment schedule in excess of 12 months.
Justification must demonstrate that severe hardship would result for a liquidation period of 12
months.

             (a) When a PCS move causes unusually large expenses and the Service member
justifies that repayment within 12 months would create a severe hardship, Military Service-
designated approval authorities may authorize, in writing, repayment up to a period of 24
months.

           (b) Extended repayment terms are for clearly exceptional cases and should be
authorized with discretion only when fully justified by compelling reasons of hardship. For
example:

               1. Outstanding debts that significantly reduce the Service member’s discretionary
paycheck.



                                                  4
Change 1, 04/20/2020                                                        ENCLOSURE
                                                              DoDI 1340.18, September 11, 2012


               2. Support of a large number of dependents.

               3. Specifics of a Service member’s financial situation that might indicate a severe
hardship in repaying the advance in the normal 12-month time period.

         (3) A Service member requests an advance outside the window of 30 days before
departure to 60 days after arrival. When extenuating circumstances warrant, and when justified
by the Service member, the commander may authorize an advance up to 90 days before
departure or 180 days after arrival. Written authorization is required from the designated
approval authority. Justification must be specific to indicate the circumstances requiring an early
or late advance of pay. For example:

           (a) The early departure or late arrival of dependents.

           (b) An extended delay in acquiring permanent housing.


2. AUTHORIZATION

    a. An advance of basic pay for a PCS move in the same geographic area of a Service
member’s prior duty station, home port, or place from which ordered to active duty, is only
authorized when movement of the Service member’s household at Government expense is in
accordance with part D, chapter 5 of the Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1 (Reference
(d)).

    b. Commander oversight is an important responsibility in the advance of basic pay program.
Commanders or supervisors shall ensure Service members are aware of the options available to
ease the possible financial burden of a PCS move. Advance of basic pay is one such option.

        (1) The potential for personal financial hardship, as the result of the reduced monthly
paycheck over the repayment period, is of significant importance. It is the commander’s
responsibility to ensure the Service member is aware of the intent of an advance of basic pay,
particularly for expenses outside of the program’s scope.

       (2) An advance of basic pay is not intended to provide funds for such items as
investments, vacations, or the purchase of consumer goods that are not the result of direct
expenses resulting from the Service member’s PCS orders.

  c. A commander’s written authorization is required for any advance of pay to Service
members in grades E-3 and below.


3. REPAYMENT. Repayment for advances of basic pay incident to a PCS are in accordance
with table 32-2 in volume 7A, chapter 32 of DoD 7000.14-R (Reference (e)).




                                                5
Change 1, 04/20/2020                                                        ENCLOSURE
                                                               DoDI 1340.18, September 11, 2012


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


DASD(MPP) Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy

PCS             permanent change of station


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS


Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

basic pay less deductions. The sum of money for an individual’s basic pay, less deductions, as
delineated in table 32-1 of chapter 32, volume 7A of Reference (e).

PCS. Defined in Reference (d).




   Change 1, 04/20/2020                             6                              GLOSSARY
