                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 1005.15
                                                                                 August 6, 2013
                                                 Incorporating Change 1, Effective July 22, 2022

                                                                                           DA&M

SUBJECT:      DoD Civilian Flags

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5105.53 (Reference (a)), this
instruction:

    a. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for the design, use, and modification of
positional, Senior Executive Service (SES), and Military Department-specific SES flags (referred
to collectively in this instruction as “DoD civilian flags”).

  b. Incorporates and cancels Director of Administration and Management (DA&M)
Memorandums (References (b), (c), (d), and (e)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to in this
instruction as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. DoD civilian flags:

        (1) Will be displayed only in the office of the official to whom the flag is issued or at
official ceremonies when the official participates or serves as host. Use of DoD civilian flags by
individuals not approved in accordance with this instruction is prohibited.

        (2) Are purchased with federal funds and, as such, are the property of the U.S.
Government and should be accounted for on DoD Component property records. Retention of
positional flags by officials when departing a position is prohibited. However, consistent with
federal and agency statutes and regulations, replica flags may be awarded to departing officials.
                                                                    DoDI 1005.15, August 6, 2013



   b. Positional Flags

       (1) Positional flags are approved for use by DoD civilian officials, if they are:

           (a) Appointed into an office within the DoD to which appointment is required to be
made by the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate, such as a Presidentially
appointed, Senate-confirmed (PAS) official; or

           (b) An acting PAS official, pursuant to sections 3345 through 3349d of Title 5,
United States Code, also known as “The Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998” (Reference (f)),
or performing the duties of a PAS official.

      (2) The DA&M approves the design, use, and modification of positional flags for OSD
PAS officials. (See Figure 1.)

                         Figure 1. Positional Flags for OSD PAS Officials




Change 1, 07/22/2022                            2
                                                                    DoDI 1005.15, August 6, 2013


       (3) The Secretaries of the Military Departments approve the design, use, and
modification of positional flags for Military Department PAS officials.

   c. SES and Military Department-Specific SES Flags

       (1) DoD civilian officials are authorized use of the Office of Personnel and
Management-approved SES flag (referred to in this instruction as the “SES flag”) if they are
appointed into the SES. Officials serving in SES positions that are detailed or acting, and are not
appointed to the SES, are not authorized use of the SES flag.

       (2) The Secretaries of the Military Departments may approve the design, use, and
modification of Military Department-specific SES flags for their respective SES officials.
Figure 2 shows the SES flag and the currently approved Military Department-specific SES flags.

                   Figure 2. SES and Military Department-specific SES Flags




4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Unlimited. This instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance removes the expiration language
in accordance with DoD Instruction 5025.01 (Reference (g)).




Change 1, 07/22/2022                             3
                                                             DoDI 1005.15, August 6, 2013


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective August 6, 2013.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 07/22/2022                        4
                                                                DoDI 1005.15, August 6, 2013


                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5105.53, “Director of Administration and Management (DA&M),”
    February 26, 2008
(b) Director of Administration and Management Memorandum, “Positional Flags for Senior
    Civilian Officials in the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD),” October 26, 2011
    (hereby cancelled)
(c) Director of Administration and Management Memorandum, “Positional Flags for Senior
    Civilian Officials in the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD),” November 29, 2011
    (hereby cancelled)
(d) Director of Administration and Management Memorandum, “Retaining Department of
    Defense (DoD) Positional Flags,” December 19, 2008 (hereby cancelled)
(e) Director of Administration and Management Memorandum, “Positional Flags for Senior
    Civilian Officials in the Office of the Secretary of Defense,” October 31, 2003 (hereby
    cancelled)
(f) Title 5, United States Code
(g) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuance Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended




Change 1, 07/22/2022                          5                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDI 1005.15, August 6, 2013


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES

1. DA&M. The DA&M:

   a. Approves the design, use, and modification of OSD positional flags and the SES flag, in
consultation with The Institute of Heraldry.

    b. Approves the award of replica flags for departing officials in the OSD, the Office of the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office
of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, and the DoD Field
Activities.


2. DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON HEADQUARTERS SERVICES (WHS). Under the authority,
direction, and control of the DA&M, the Director, WHS:

    a. Establishes eligibility, criteria, and procedures for an honorary awards program to present
replica flags to officials authorized positional flags on their departure from the OSD, the Office
of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, and the
DoD Field Activities.

    b. Procures and stocks replica civilian positional flags in sufficient quantities to meet
demand for departing OSD PAS officials and, on approval by the DA&M, personalizes and
issues replica positional flags to departing OSD PAS officials.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments:

   a. Approve the design, use, and modification of positional flags and Military Department-
specific SES flags within their respective Military Departments.

   b. Approve the award of replica flags for departing officials within their respective Military
Departments.

    c. Establish guidance for displaying OSD positional flags in concert with the flags of their
respective organizations, when applicable, during ceremonies or other official events.


4. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff establishes guidance for displaying OSD positional flags in concert with the flags of the
Joint Staff and Combatant Commands, when applicable, during ceremonies or other official
events.



Change 1, 07/22/2022                            6                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 1005.15, August 6, 2013


                                           GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMNS

 DA&M            Director of Administration and Management


 PAS             Presidentially appointed, Senate-confirmed

 SES             Senior Executive Service


 WHS             Washington Headquarters Services


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this instruction.

DoD civilian flags. Includes positional, SES, and Military Department-specific SES flags that
are authorized for use by DoD civilian officials, in accordance with this instruction.

Military Department-specific SES flag. A two-sided, approximately 3’ x 4’, gold-fringed flag
that features the SES keystone logo and is approved for use by the Secretary of a Military
Department, in accordance with this instruction.

PAS official. The officials within the DoD that are designated by statute to be appointed from
civilian life by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. The term “PAS
official” in this context does not refer to the judges of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed
Forces.

positional flag. A flag authorized to certain civilian and military officials of the U.S.
Government, to which the officials are entitled by virtue of their official status or position and
represents specific positions within the government, but does not include an SES flag or Military
Department-specific SES flag.

replica flag. A smaller (approximately 1/4 scale), framed replica of an official’s full-sized flag
that may be presented as a cost-effective memento of the official’s service in the position.

SES flag. The official U.S. Government SES flag approved by the Office of Personnel
Management for use by all Federal Government senior executives in 1989 (two-sided, 3’ x 4’,
gold-fringed flag features the SES keystone logo appliqued in gold, encircled by 13 five-point
gold stars on a field of navy blue).




Change 1, 07/22/2022                             7                           GLOSSARY
