                        Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                      NUMBER 1100.4
                                                                      February 12, 2005

                                                                              USD(P&R)


SUBJECT: Guidance for Manpower Management

References: (a) DoD Directive 1100.4, "Guidance for Manpower Programs,"
                August 20, 1954 (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Directive 1100.9, "Military-Civilian Staffing of Management
                Positions in the Support Activities," September 8, 1971 (hereby
                canceled)
            (c) DoD Directive 1100.18 "Wartime Manpower Mobilization Planning,"
                January 31, 1986 (hereby canceled)
            (d) Sections 126a, 129, 153, 801-946, 1580, 1586, and 2434 of title 10,
                United States Code
            (e) through (j), see enclosure 1


1. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE

This Directive:

   1.1. Reissues reference (a).

   1.2. Replaces references (b) and (c).

   1.3. Implements reference (d).

    1.4. Authorizes the update of DoD Directive 5100.73 (reference (e)) to provide
further guidance for the implementation of this Directive.




                                           1
                                                                     DoDD 1100.4, February 12, 2005




2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military
Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense
(hereafter referred to collectively as the "DoD Components"). The term "Military
Services," as used herein, refers to the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine
Corps.


3. POLICY

It is DoD policy that:

    3.1. Guiding Principles. National military objectives shall be accomplished with a
minimum of manpower that is organized and employed to provide maximum
effectiveness and combat power.

        3.1.1. Manpower management shall be flexible, adaptive to program changes, and
responsive to crisis situations and new management strategies. New policy, including
fiscal policy, shall be evaluated before implementing to decide its effect on manpower
and personnel performance. Existing policies, procedures, and structures shall be
periodically evaluated to ensure efficient and effective use of manpower resources.

       3.1.2. Long-range strategies and workforce forecasts shall be developed to
implement major changes to policy, doctrine, materiel, force structure, and training, while
maintaining ready forces and assuring the greatest possible productivity and
effectiveness.

      3.1.3. Manpower management shall be governed by prevailing Presidential and
departmental guidelines.

   3.2. Requirements Determination. Manpower requirements are driven by workload
and shall be established at the minimum levels necessary to accomplish mission and
performance objectives. Manpower is a resource. Changes in manpower shall be
preceded by changes to the programs, missions, and functions that require manpower
resources.




                                            2
                                                                     DoDD 1100.4, February 12, 2005




       3.2.1. Manpower requirements for infrastructure activities shall be maintained at
the lowest possible proportion of the total force structure. Manpower in support functions
or specialties shall be maintained at the lowest level practicable to optimize combat
capability within the operating forces.

      3.2.2. Activities shall be organized to promote efficient and effective operations,
optimize personnel utilization, and maintain a high level of productivity and morale.
Measures of performance shall be established as indicators of mission accomplishment
and shall be regularly monitored by officials with responsibility for manpower
management. Dual staffing (double billeting) of positions shall be avoided.

        3.2.3. Assigned missions shall be accomplished using the least costly mix of
personnel (military, civilian and contract) consistent with military requirements and other
needs of the Department as prescribed by reference (d). Functions that are inherently
governmental shall not be contracted. Manpower authorities shall consider all available
sources when determining manpower mix to include the Active and Reserve military
manpower, U.S. and foreign national civilian manpower; intra-governmental, contract,
and host-nation support. In addition, during mobilization planning, military retirees,
volunteers, and recruits shall be considered. In areas that require both military (Active
and Reserve) and civilian personnel, manpower requirements shall be determined in total
and designated as military (Active or Reserve) or civilian, but not both, i.e., based on an
analysis of workload and force issues at a given point in time, a military (Active or
Reserve)/civilian determination for the requirement must be made. This does not
preclude the DoD Components from recoding the category in the future based on changes
in requirements, force structure or policy. Manpower shall be designated as civilian
except when military incumbency is required for reasons of law, command and control of
crisis situations, combat readiness, or esprit de corps; when unusual working conditions
are not conducive to civilian employment; or when military-unique knowledge and skills
are required for successful performance of the duties. In addition, the following
considerations shall apply:

           3.2.3.1. Manpower authorities shall designate sufficient manpower to provide
a rotation base for military personnel and for civilian employees assigned outside the
United States, consistent with reference (d).

          3.2.3.2. When designating management positions as military (Active or
Reserve) or civilian, career opportunities for both categories of personnel shall be
considered. Sufficient manpower positions shall be designated as military to enable
development of combat-related skills or to promote career development in military
competencies. Sufficient manpower positions shall be designated as civilian to develop
competencies and skills that may not be taught or recruited directly from the private
sector.


                                             3
                                                                      DoDD 1100.4, February 12, 2005




           3.2.3.3. Manpower in support activities shall not be designated as military
solely for the purpose of exercising military authority under Sections 801-946 of
reference (d). Support activities may be assigned or attached to secondary activities to
preserve military order and discipline.

        3.2.4. The peacetime workforce shall be structured to accomplish day-to-day
activities and satisfy projected mobilization, contingency, and wartime demands that may
not be met with personnel acquired after mobilization. All mission requirements shall be
considered concurrently as part of an integrated manpower requirements determination
process.

            3.2.4.1. A formal validated process shall be used to determine mobilization,
contingency, and wartime manpower requirements. Mobilization planning shall include
all activities necessary to enable time-phased, scenario-specific mobilization. This
process shall provide a range of options for improvements in force readiness, deployment
capability, and sustainability.

          3.2.4.2. The mobilization manpower planning process shall be used to
properly size the workforce and justify manpower requests in the programming,
budgeting, and execution process.

            3.2.4.3. Mobilization and crisis planning shall give priority to optimizing the
use of all types of wartime manpower: military, civilians, and contractors. Activities not
essential to a national emergency or military contingency shall be deferred or curtailed to
allow reallocation of the personnel to higher priority tasks. During a conflict, military
personnel shall be assigned only to those tasks that directly contribute to the military
effort, except positions that require military incumbency for reasons of law or esprit de
corps; when alternate manpower is not available; or, when military-unique knowledge
and skills are required for successful performance of the duties.

           3.2.4.4. Civilian positions critical to an emergency or contingency shall be
designated as "Emergency-Essential," pursuant to section 1580 of reference (d).
Identification of positions as Emergency-Essential shall be limited to those positions
specifically required to ensure the success of combat operations or the availability of
combat-essential systems, as outlined in DoD Directive1404.10 (reference (g)).
Personnel assigned to these positions shall be designated as “key” in accordance with
DoD Directive 1200.7 (reference (f)) and must be exempted from recall to the Military
Reserves or recall to active duty for retired military.




                                             4
                                                                      DoDD 1100.4, February 12, 2005




   3.3. Resource Allocations, Authorizations, and Manpower Constraints

        3.3.1. Military (Active and Reserve) and civilian manpower resources shall be
programmed in accordance with validated manpower requirements, and within fiscal
limits and acceptable levels of risk identified in Defense planning and programming
guidance.

       3.3.2. Military (Active and Reserve) and civilian manpower resources shall be
allocated to maintain ready forces and accomplish defense missions in priority order, and
commensurate with available resources and Congressional constraints.

       3.3.3. Authorized military manpower levels and appropriated civilian resources
shall be fully allocated to approve programs by defense program elements consistent with
budget submissions and Congressional direction.

       3.3.4. Consistent with section 129a (reference (d)), the civilian workforce shall be
managed solely on the basis of workload and fiscal year funding. Additionally, civilian
manpower shall be authorized for fill based on available funds, mission priority, and
consistent with Congressional constraints. The civilian workforce shall not be subject to
any constraints or limitation in terms of man-years, end strength, full-time equivalents
positions, or maximum number of employees, except where imposed specifically by the
Congress. Full-time equivalent estimates must represent an effective and efficient use of
resources to meet program requirements.

   3.4. Manpower Planning

       3.4.1. The DoD Components shall, as part of programs such as Human Systems
Integration, minimize system support costs by addressing manpower affordability early in
the acquisition process. If appropriate, manpower goals and parameters shall be
established to ensure programs do not exceed what the Component is able to invest for
operating, maintaining, and supporting the system. Manpower estimates of defense
acquisition systems shall be developed to support both acquisition milestone decision
reviews consistent with reference (d) and strategic planning of manpower resources.

       3.4.2. Consistent with section 126 of reference (d), when a function, power, or
duty of a DoD Component is transferred or assigned to another Component,
consideration shall be given to the concomitant transfer of manpower.




                                             5
                                                                       DoDD 1100.4, February 12, 2005




4. RESPONSIBILITIES

   4.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)) shall:

       4.1.1. Ensure that new policy, including fiscal policy, is fully evaluated for its
effect on manpower and personnel performance prior to implementation. All fiscal
policies shall be coordinated with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller).

     4.1.2. Issue guidance to be used by the DoD Components regarding manpower
management.

       4.1.3. Coordinate on proposed military (Active and Reserve) and civilian
authorization changes that deviate from programmed levels during the year of execution.

      4.1.4. Provide guidance on manpower levels for the Military Departments, the
Defense Agencies, and the other DoD Components.

     4.1.5. Review manpower management guidelines and practices of the DoD
Components for compliance with established policies and guidance.

       4.1.6. Prepare manpower reports, as required by the Congress.

      4.1.7. Establish DoD manpower mobilization guidance and coordinate manpower
mobilization policy and its implementation.

       4.1.8. Develop manpower mix criteria and DoD function codes which shall be
used by DoD Components to determine workforce mix and annual commercial activities
inventory required by Section 501 note of title 31, United States Code (reference (h)).

    4.2. The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Civilian Personnel Policy
(DUSD(CPP)), under the USD(P&R), shall, as part of mobilization planning, facilitate
the detailing, reassigning, or relocating of civilian personnel in activities no longer
needed by one DoD Component to satisfy the critical workload of another DoD
Component.

  4.3. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD(HA)), under the
USD(P&R), shall, as part of mobilization planning, facilitate reassignment of military
medical personnel in excess of materiel or facility capabilities of one Military
Department to the medical facilities of another Military Department, as practical.




                                              6
                                                                        DoDD 1100.4, February 12, 2005




   4.4. The Heads of the DoD Components shall designate an individual(s) with full
authority for manpower management including:

     4.4.1. Prescribing concepts for implementing fiscal year guidance and manpower
management policy in the individual DoD Components.

       4.4.2. Ensuring that the policies in this Directive are reflected in all relevant
issuances and concepts.

       4.4.3. Ensuring that new manpower requirements are identified with sufficient
lead time to enable appropriate personnel actions.

       4.4.4. Ensuring that manpower strength levels are programmed to optimize
readiness and sustainability, and that the Individuals Account is funded sufficiently to
man the force adequately.

        4.4.5. Developing annual manpower requests to the Congress, considering the
advantages of converting from one form of support (military (Active or Reserve),
civilian, or contractor) to another for the performance of a specified function, consistent
with section 129a, (reference (d)).

       4.4.6. Conducting a continuous review of manpower utilization plans and
programs for their Components, and developing programs to enhance the effectiveness
and productivity of military (Active and Reserve) and civilian manpower across the
spectrum of Component missions.

        4.4.7. Planning for reassigning, reallocating, and detailing of civilian personnel
activities no longer needed by a DoD Component to satisfy the critical workload of
another DoD Component, as part of mobilization planning and as directed by the
DUSD(CPP) and the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy in
conjunction with the ASD(HA).
       4.4.8. Identifying for assignment members of the Individual Ready Reserve to
units of the Active or Reserve components, to facilitate enhancement of refresher
training, rapid deployment, and effective utilization in an armed conflict war or national
emergency, consistent with DoD Directive 1235.13 (reference (i)).

       4.4.9. Providing, when cost-effective, for the cross-training of civilian personnel
during peacetime so they may be utilized in other mission-critical areas during a
mobilization or war.

       4.4.10. Establishing and maintaining manpower data systems that:


                                              7
                                                                       DoDD 1100.4, February 12, 2005




         4.4.10.1. Account for all manpower resources (active military, DoD civilian,
Reserve component, contract, and host-nation support).

          4.4.10.2. Document all manpower requirements, authorizations, and contract
equivalents, including time-phased wartime requirements.

          4.4.10.3. Provide a method for forecasting future manpower requirements.

          4.4.10.4. Support the data reporting requirements for DoD Instruction 7730.64
(reference (j)).

      4.4.12. Providing the authority and establishing the management procedures
necessary for reasonable assurance that both military (Active and Reserve) and civilian
mobilization or wartime manpower demands may be satisfied.

    4.5. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall plan for the effective retention
or replacement in wartime of civilian employees and contractor personnel who are
performing critical support activities.

   4.6. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall, consistent with reference (d),
advise the Secretary of Defense on:

       4.6.1. Critical deficiencies and strengths in manpower force capabilities identified
during the preparation and review of contingency plans and assessing the effect of such
deficiencies and strengths on meeting national security objectives and policy and on
strategic plans.

       4.6.2. The Military Departments' and the other DoD Components' fiscal year
program recommendations and budget proposals conform with the manpower priorities
established in strategic plans and with the priorities established for the requirements of
the Combatant Commands.

    4.7. The Commanders of the Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall plan for the effective retention or replacement in wartime of
civilian employees and contractor personnel who are performing critical support
activities.




                                              8
                                               DoDD 1100.4, February 12, 2005




5. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 1
 E1. References, continued




                                           9
                                                                DoDD 1100.4, February 12, 2005



                                E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                             REFERENCES, continued

(e) DoD Directive 5100.73, "Major Department of Defense Headquarters Activities,"
    May 13, 1999
(f) DoD Directive 1200.7, "Screening for Ready Reserve," November 18, 1999
(g) DoD Directive 1404.10, "Emergency Essential (E-E) DoD U.S. Citizen Civilian
    Employees," April 10, 1992
(h) Section 501 of title 31, United States Code
(i) DoD Directive 1235.13, "Management of the Individual Ready Reserve (IRR) and the
    Inactive National Guard (ING)," November 19, 1997
(j) DoD Instruction 7730.64, "Automated Extracts of Manpower and Unit Organizational
    Element Files," March 7, 1995




                                          10                             ENCLOSURE 1
