                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 3210.06
                                                                              February 6, 2014
                                                      Incorporating Change 2, October 15, 2018

                                                                                    USD(R&E)

SUBJECT:     Defense Grant and Agreement Regulatory System (DGARS)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive reissues DoD Directive 3210.6 (Reference (a)) to:

   a. Update established policy and assigned responsibilities for the DGARS.

    b. Provide for DoD Components’ use of the policies and procedures in the regulations
published in Chapter I, Subchapter C of Title 32, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (b))
and Chapter XI of Title 2, Code of Federal Regulations (Reference (c)). References (b) and (c)
are also known and referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD Grant and Agreement
Regulations.”

   c. Cancel DoD 3210.6-R (Reference (d)).


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, and all Defense
Agencies, DoD Field Activities, and other organizational entities within the DoD that are
authorized to award or administer grants, cooperative agreements, and other non-procurement
transactions subject to the DGARS (referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD
Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. Grants and cooperative agreements may be used only for purposes that are in accordance
with chapter 63 of Title 31, United States Code (Reference (e)), also known as “The Federal
Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act of 1977.” Exceptions may be made where statute permits
otherwise.

   b. Grants and cooperative agreements must be awarded through competition in every case in
which statute requires competition and to the maximum extent practicable in all other cases.
                                                               DoDD 3210.06, February 6, 2014

    c. DoD Components’ award and administration of non-procurement transactions subject to
the DGARS must be in accordance with all applicable DGARS issuances, including applicable
provisions of the DoD Grant and Agreement Regulations.

   d. The DGARS will:

       (1) Be responsive to DoD needs for efficient program execution, effective program
oversight, and proper stewardship of federal funds.

      (2) Provide for compliance with relevant statutes and Executive orders and for DoD
implementation of applicable guidance, such as circulars of the Office of Management and
Budget.

        (3) Provide for collection, retention, and dissemination of management and fiscal data
related to non-procurement transactions subject to the DGARS to:

           (a) Support policy formulation.

           (b) Meet Federal Government-wide reporting requirements.

           (c) Support the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense in
meeting its responsibilities for audit and oversight.

        (4) Apply to DoD grants and cooperative agreements. If implementation of statutes,
Executive orders, or Federal Government-wide circulars or rulemakings requires the DoD to
issue rules or policies applicable to other non-procurement agreements, in addition to grants and
cooperative agreements, the DGARS may include the rules or policies. The DGARS must state
the applicability of those rules or policies to other non-procurement agreements.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this directive to the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (f)).




Change 2, 10/15/2018                            2
                                                          DoDD 3210.06, February 6, 2014

7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective February 6, 2014.




                                            Christine H. Fox
                                            Acting Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 2, 10/15/2018                        3
                                                              DoDD 3210.06, February 6, 2014

                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                        REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 3210.6, “Defense Grant and Agreement Regulatory System (DGARS),”
      December 17, 2003 (hereby cancelled)
(b)   Chapter I, Subchapter C of Title 32, Code of Federal Regulations
(c)   Chapter XI of Title 2, Code of Federal Regulations
(d)   DoD 3210.6-R, “Department of Defense Grant and Agreement Regulations,” April 13,
      1998, as amended (hereby cancelled)
(e)   Chapter 63 of Title 31, United States Code
(f)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
      Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
      of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(g)   Title 10, United States Code
(h)   Section 3710a of Title 15, United States Code




Change 2, 10/15/2018                           4                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 3210.06, February 6, 2014

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING
(ASD(R&E)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, the ASD(R&E):

    a. Develops and implements DGARS policies and procedures through the issuance of the
DoD Grant and Agreement Regulations and, as necessary, DoD instructions and other issuances.
The ASD(R&E) will coordinate changes to the DoD Grant and Agreement Regulations with the
Military Departments and other appropriate DoD Components, in addition to publishing them in
the Federal Register.

    b. Develops and implements policies and procedures in the DGARS for use of
non-procurement transactions other than grants and cooperative agreements that are authorized
by section 2371 of Title 10, United States Code (Reference (g)). The ASD(R&E) may include
the policies and procedures in the DoD Grant and Agreement Regulations where doing so is
appropriate; he or she may otherwise include them in DoD instructions or other issuances. For
these purposes, the ASD(R&E) is delegated the authorities and responsibilities of the Secretary
of Defense pursuant to section 2371 of Reference (g) as it applies to non-procurement
instruments, with the authority to redelegate.


2. OSD AND DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The OSD and DoD Component heads will ensure
compliance with the DoD Grant and Agreement Regulations, as published in the Code of Federal
Regulations, and other DGARS policies and procedures within their respective Components.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND DIRECTORS OF THE
DEFENSE AGENCIES. The Secretary of the Military Departments and Directors of the
Defense Agencies must each:

    a. Designate an official who is authorized to coordinate on DGARS provisions for the
Component, if the Component uses grants, cooperative agreements, or other non-procurement
transactions subject to the DGARS.

    b. Provide written notification within 120 days to the ASD(R&E) any time that a new
official is designated to coordinate on DGARS provisions for the Component in accordance with
paragraph 3a of this enclosure.


4. DIRECTORS OF THE DEFENSE AGENCIES. In addition to the responsibilities in section
3 of this enclosure, the Directors of the Defense Agencies are delegated:




Change 2, 10/15/2018                            5                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 3210.06, February 6, 2014

    a. The authority of the Secretary of Defense pursuant to section 2358 of Reference (g) to
perform research and development projects by grant or cooperative agreement.

   b. The associated responsibility of the Secretary of Defense pursuant to section 2358 of
Reference (g) to determine that a research project or study is of interest to the DoD before using
any funds appropriated to the DoD to finance the project or study.




Change 2, 10/15/2018                             6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 3210.06, February 6, 2014

                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(R&E) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering


DGARS         Defense Grant and Agreement Regulatory System


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

cooperative agreement. A legal instrument used to enter into the same kind of relationship as a
grant (see definition, below), except that substantial involvement is expected between the DoD
and the recipient when carrying out the activity contemplated by the cooperative agreement. The
term does not include cooperative research and development agreements as defined in section
3710a of Title 15, United States Code (Reference (h)).

DGARS. A system of policies and procedures to guide DoD grants and cooperative agreements
that includes the DoD Grant and Agreement Regulations and other issuances. It governs other
non-procurement transactions, in addition to grants and cooperative agreements, where its
provisions so indicate.

grant. A legal instrument used to enter into a relationship, the principal purpose of which is to
transfer a thing of value to the recipient to carry out a public purpose of support or stimulation
authorized by a law of the United States, rather than to acquire property or services for the
DoD’s direct benefit or use. Further, it is a relationship in which substantial involvement is not
expected between the DoD and the recipient when carrying out the activity contemplated by the
grant.




Change 2, 10/15/2018                             7                                    GLOSSARY
