                         DOD INSTRUCTION 5132.14
   ASSESSMENT, MONITORING, AND EVALUATION POLICY
      FOR THE SECURITY COOPERATION ENTERPRISE

Originating Component:       Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy

Effective:                   January 13, 2017

Releasability:               Cleared for public release. Available from the DoD Issuances
                             Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.

Approved by:                 Brian P. McKeon, Performing the Duties of the Under Secretary of
                             Defense for Policy


Purpose: In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5111.1 and the November 30,
2006, Deputy Secretary of Defense memorandum, this issuance establishes policy and assigns
responsibilities for conducting assessment, monitoring, and evaluation (AM&E) of security
cooperation plans, programs, and activities consistent with the Deputy Secretary of Defense
Guidance of August 29, 2016, DoD Directive 5132.03, Section 1202 of Public Law 114-92,
Public Law 111-352, Presidential Policy Directive 23, and other relevant statutory authorities
under Titles 10, 22, and 50 of the United States Code (U.S.C.).
                                                                                               DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Policy. ............................................................................................................................... 3
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES ......................................................................................................... 5
   2.1. Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P))............................................................. 5
   2.2. Director, DSCA................................................................................................................. 6
   2.3. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. ....................... 6
   2.4. Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer of the
       Department of Defense. ...................................................................................................... 7
   2.5. Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence. ................................................................... 7
   2.6. Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation. .................................................... 8
   2.7. Deputy Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense. ................................. 8
   2.8. Secretaries of the Military Departments and Directors of the Defense Agencies. ........... 8
   2.9. CJCS. ................................................................................................................................ 9
   2.10. GCCs. ............................................................................................................................ 10
   2.11. Functional Combatant Commanders............................................................................. 10
SECTION 3: AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS ..................................................................... 12
   3.1 General Framework. ........................................................................................................ 12
   3.2. Initial Assessment Standards. ......................................................................................... 13
   3.3. Security Cooperation IDD Standards.............................................................................. 14
   3.4. Performance Management and Monitoring Standards. .................................................. 15
   3.5. Evaluation Standards. ..................................................................................................... 16
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 20
   G.1. Acronyms ....................................................................................................................... 20
   G.2. Definitions...................................................................................................................... 20
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 24

FIGURES
Figure 1. AM&E Framework....................................................................................................... 13




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                                 DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY. This issuance:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in
this issuance as the “DoD Components”).

    b. Does not apply to any DoD effort to provide emergency foreign disaster assistance
pursuant to a commander’s immediate response authority, as established in Section 404 or 2561
of Title 10, U.S.C.

   c. Does not apply to programs administered by DoD pursuant to Title 22, U.S.C.


1.2. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. AM&E of security cooperation programs will:

        (1) Foster accurate and transparent reporting to key stakeholders on the outcomes and
sustainability of security cooperation and track, understand, and improve returns on DoD
security cooperation investments.

      (2) Identify and disseminate best practices and lessons learned for security cooperation
implementation to inform decisions about security cooperation policy, plans, programs, program
management, resources, and the security cooperation workforce.

    b. DoD will maintain a robust AM&E program in support of DoD security cooperation
efforts, including:

        (1) Conducting initial assessments to inform initiative design and establish a baseline
against which to track progress in advance of all significant security cooperation initiatives.

        (2) Developing an initiative design document (IDD) with applicable elements, to guide
all significant security cooperation initiatives.

       (3) Monitoring progress of significant security cooperation initiatives toward desired
outcomes by tracking inputs (e.g., funding, manpower, and expertise), then determining whether
programmatic milestones are achieved within anticipated timeframes, budgets, and outcomes,
including whether desired results or effects are occurring within the timeframe anticipated.

       (4) Conducting centralized independent and rigorous evaluations of significant security
cooperation initiatives to examine their relevance, effectiveness, and sustainability.

   c. AM&E will be integrated into security cooperation planning at all stages.



SECTION 1. GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                           3
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


    d. Lessons learned derived from evaluations across DoD will be developed and disseminated
to inform future security cooperation planning and resource decisions.

   e. Collaborative evaluations across DoD Components as well as with other U.S. Government
agencies and international partners should facilitate mutual learning and reduce costs.

   f. AM&E practices will conform with applicable laws and Presidential directives.

    g. Based on resources allocated for security cooperation programs and activities, DoD will
ensure sufficient funds are made available in accordance with DoD strategy, administration
policy, and international best practices, to support:

       (1) The conduct of centralized independent evaluations and dissemination of lessons
learned.

      (2) Training and technical assistance to the security cooperation workforce for
conducting and supporting AM&E functions.

       (3) AM&E policy implementation by DoD Components.

   h. Unclassified summaries of the evaluation of DoD security cooperation activities will be
made publically available, unless it is determined that disclosure of the summary information
could be expected to cause foreseeable harm to the United States or a partner nation.

   i. These practices are applied to all appropriate security cooperation activities in line with
guidance and standards identified in this issuance.




SECTION 1. GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                             4
                                                                 DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


                           SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) is
responsible for the oversight and management of the security cooperation AM&E enterprise. In
this capacity, the USD(P):

  a. Formulates policies and processes to standardize and synchronize DoD Component
AM&E efforts.

   b. Maintains and oversees a centralized evaluation office to coordinate and facilitate the
conduct of independent evaluations of significant security cooperation initiatives and to provide
DoD-wide guidance, tools, and templates on all aspects of AM&E, by:

       (1) Serving as a resource to all DoD Components for technical assistance and subject
matter expertise.

       (2) Facilitating the timely tracking, follow-up, and reporting of evaluations.

       (3) Storing and disseminating, across DoD Components, lessons learned derived from
evaluations, including briefings of evaluation findings, best practices, and recommendations to
relevant DoD Components, before program planning for the following fiscal year.

    c. Annually determines priorities for independent evaluations and, in consultation with the
Director, Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA); the Director of Cost Assessment and
Program Evaluation; and the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer
of the Department of Defense, sets the budget and resource allocations for AM&E functions.
Allocations will support:

       (1) The conduct of independent evaluations for priority security cooperation initiatives
and dissemination of lessons learned.

      (2) Training and technical assistance to the security cooperation workforce for
conducting and supporting AM&E functions.

      (3) Additional resources, as needed, to support DoD Component AM&E policy
implementation.

    d. Reviews individual evaluation summaries and the comprehensive set of summaries for
potential public release on the DoD website and determines if the summary information could be
expected to cause foreseeable harm to the United States or an allied or partner nation.

   e. Represents DoD security cooperation AM&E goals, policies, and priorities to external
audiences, including interagency and international partners.

    f. Ensures that security cooperation activities implemented by the Office of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy are appropriately assessed and monitored, including by ensuring
that appropriate data is entered into a global theater security cooperation information


SECTION 2. RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                         5
                                                                 DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


management system (G-TSCMIS). Conducts evaluations as needed to inform security
cooperation management decisions, and ensures such evaluations are in compliance with
standards identified in Paragraph 3.5.

    g. Incorporates relevant evaluation recommendations as outlined in Paragraph 3.5.f. and
applies lessons learned and best practices from monitoring and evaluations to make adjustments,
as needed, to policy, program, and resource allocation decisions.

   h. Makes available subject matter expertise, as appropriate, to support geographic
Combatant Commanders (GCCs) in the development of assessments and IDDs for significant
security cooperation initiatives.


2.2. DIRECTOR, DSCA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), the
Director, DSCA:

   a. Establishes standards for AM&E training within the security cooperation workforce.

    b. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the CJCS, and other
DoD Components, as appropriate, ensures resource allocations are sufficient to support a security
cooperation workforce that is appropriately sized, properly assigned, and possesses the requisite
skills, training, and resources to implement DoD’s AM&E policy.

   c. Makes available subject matter expertise, as appropriate, to support GCCs in the
development of assessments and IDDs for significant security cooperation initiatives.

    d. Makes relevant source documents available and participates, as appropriate, in support of
the independent evaluations directed by the USD(P).

    e. Develops and maintains data management capabilities for AM&E, including collection,
retention, and appropriate dissemination of initial assessments, IDDs, and evaluation reports
from all DoD Components.

  f. Manages the development and operation of a G-TSCMIS to support planning and
monitoring of security cooperation activities, and enters appropriate data into the system.

    g. Incorporates relevant evaluation recommendations as outlined in Paragraph 3.5.f. and
applies lessons learned and best practices from monitoring and evaluations to make adjustments,
as needed, to policy, program, and resource allocation decisions.


2.3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics:

   a. Ensures that security cooperation activities implemented by the Office of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (e.g., collaboration in science
and technology, research, development, test, and evaluation, acquisition, in-service, and logistics
support (Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreements) are appropriately assessed and


SECTION 2. RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        6
                                                                 DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


monitored, including by ensuring that appropriate data is entered into a G-TSCMIS. Conducts
evaluations as needed to inform security cooperation management decisions in compliance with
the standards in Paragraph 3.5.

    b. Incorporates relevant evaluation recommendations as outlined in Paragraph 3.5.f. and
applies lessons learned and best practices from monitoring and evaluations to make adjustments,
as needed, to policy, program, and resource allocation decisions.

    c. Makes relevant source documents available and participates, as appropriate, in support of
the independent evaluations directed by the USD(P).

   d. Makes available subject matter expertise, as appropriate, to support GCCs in the
development of assessments and IDDs for significant security cooperation initiatives.


2.4. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. The Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer of the Department of Defense:

   a. Coordinates with the USD(P) on budget levels, program adjustments, and allocations to
ensure the availability of sufficient resources to support security cooperation AM&E efforts.

    b. Incorporates relevant evaluation recommendations as outlined in Paragraph 3.5.f. and
applies lessons learned and best practices from monitoring and evaluations to make adjustments,
as needed, to policy, program, and resource allocation decisions.

   c. Makes available subject matter expertise, as appropriate, to support GCCs in the
development of assessments and IDDs for significant security cooperation initiatives.

    d. Makes relevant source documents available and participates, as appropriate, in support of
the independent evaluations directed by the USD(P).


2.5. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE. The Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence:

   a. Ensures that defense intelligence collection and analysis is sufficient to support security
cooperation AM&E, particularly for significant security cooperation initiatives.

    b. Ensures security cooperation activities implemented by the Office of the Under Secretary
of Defense for Intelligence are appropriately assessed and monitored, including by ensuring that
appropriate data is entered into a G-TSCMIS. Conducts evaluations as needed to inform security
cooperation management decisions, in compliance with the standards in Paragraph 3.5.

    c. Incorporates relevant evaluation recommendations as outlined in Paragraph 3.5.f. and
applies lessons learned and best practices from monitoring and evaluations to make adjustments,
as needed, to policy, program, and resource allocation decisions.




SECTION 2. RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                         7
                                                                DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


   d. Makes available subject matter expertise, as appropriate, to support GCCs in the
development of assessments and IDDs for significant security cooperation initiatives.

    e. Makes relevant source documents available and participates, as appropriate, in support of
the independent evaluations directed by the USD(P).


2.6. DIRECTOR OF COST ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAM EVALUATION. The
Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation:

   a. Provides input to the USD(P) on annual priorities for centralized, independent evaluation.

   b. Utilizes the assessments, evaluations, and DoD Components’ program and budget
submissions to inform deliberations and programmatic alternatives regarding security
cooperation during program review.

   c. Makes available subject matter expertise, as appropriate, to support GCCs in the
development of assessments and IDDs for significant security cooperation initiatives.


2.7. DEPUTY CHIEF MANAGEMENT OFFICER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE. The Deputy Chief management Officer of the Department of Defense maintains the
open.defense.gov Website and ensures that unclassified summaries of centralized evaluations,
approved for public release by the USD(P), are posted to the website and available within 90
days of completion.


2.8. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND DIRECTORS OF
THE DEFENSE AGENCIES. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Directors
of the Defense Agencies:

   a. Ensure that security cooperation workforce personnel under their authority have the
requisite skills and training to implement AM&E policies, in consultation with the Director,
DSCA.

    b. Implement resource decisions, in coordination with the Director, DSCA, and other DoD
Components, as appropriate, to ensure the security cooperation workforce is appropriately sized,
properly assigned, and possess the requisite skills, training, and resources to implement AM&E
policies.

   c. Ensure DoD-wide policies on AM&E are incorporated into DoD Component security
cooperation plans, policies, doctrine, and guidance and reflected in DoD Component
requirements and resourcing.

   d. Make available subject matter expertise, as appropriate, to support GCCs in the
development of assessments and IDDs for significant security cooperation initiatives.




SECTION 2. RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        8
                                                                DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


    e. Ensure security cooperation activities implemented by the Military Departments and
Defense Agencies are assessed and monitored, including by ensuring that appropriate data is
entered into a G-TSCMIS. Conduct evaluations as needed to inform security cooperation
management decisions in compliance with the standards in Paragraph 3.5.

    f. Incorporate relevant evaluation recommendations as outlined in Paragraph 3.5.f. and apply
lessons learned and best practices from monitoring and evaluations to make adjustments, as
needed, to policy, program, and resource allocation decisions.

    g. Make relevant source documents available and participate, as appropriate, in support of
the independent evaluations directed by the USD(P).


2.9. CJCS. The CJCS:

    a. Develops and maintains joint security cooperation doctrine consistent with DoD’s AM&E
policy.

   b. Provides input to the USD(P) on annual priorities for centralized, independent evaluation.

   c. Based on input from the GCCs, identifies shortfalls in mission execution, gaps in
preparation and training, and other key personnel issues that may hinder the implementation of
DoD’s AM&E policy and provides to the Director, DSCA, and the Secretaries of the Military
Departments recommended mitigations to address shortfalls.

    d. Ensures security cooperation activities implemented by the Joint Staff are appropriately
assessed and monitored, including by ensuring that appropriate data is entered into a G-TSCMIS.
Conducts evaluations as needed to inform security cooperation management decisions in
compliance with the standards in Paragraph 3.5.

    e. Stores and disseminates lessons learned derived from evaluations through the joint lessons
learned information system portal.

   f. Incorporates relevant evaluation recommendations as outlined in Paragraph 3.5.f. and
applies lessons learned and best practices to make adjustments, as needed, to policy, program,
and resource allocation decisions.

    g. Makes relevant source documents available and participates, as appropriate, in support of
the independent evaluations directed by the USD(P).

   h. Makes available subject matter expertise, as appropriate, to support the GCCs in the
development of assessments and IDDs for significant security cooperation initiatives.




SECTION 2. RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        9
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


2.10. GCCS. The GCCs:

    a. Identify significant security cooperation initiatives for the purposes of assessment,
monitoring, and independent evaluation in country-specific security cooperation sections of the
theater campaign plan.

   b. For all significant security cooperation initiatives, ensure assessments and monitoring are
undertaken in support of IDD execution. This includes:

       (1) Leading initial assessment efforts.

        (2) Facilitating participation of relevant subject matter experts and other appropriate
participants in assessing, developing IDDs, and monitoring implementation.

       (3) Developing the formulation of IDDs for all significant initiatives as outlined in
Paragraph 3.3.

       (4) Monitoring of all significant initiatives as outlined in Paragraph 3.4.

        (5) Submitting to the Director, DSCA, all initial assessments and IDDs for new security
cooperation initiatives, and retaining such materials for three years after completion of the
security cooperation initiative.

    c. Identify shortfalls in the size, preparation, training, and staffing of personnel assigned to
the Combatant Command with AM&E responsibilities and recommend mitigations to the CJCS.

    d. Ensure security cooperation initiatives are appropriately assessed and monitored,
including by ensuring that appropriate data is entered into a G-TSCMIS. Conduct and support
evaluations as needed to inform security cooperation management decisions in compliance with
the standards in Paragraph 3.5.

    e. Incorporate relevant evaluation recommendations as outlined in Paragraph 3.5.f. and apply
lessons learned and best practices to make adjustments, as needed, to policy, program, and
resource allocation decisions.

    f. Make relevant source documents available and participate, as appropriate, in support of
the independent evaluations directed by the USD(P).

    g. Direct the security cooperation offices of U.S. Embassies to support AM&E functions and
activities, as appropriate.


2.11. FUNCTIONAL COMBATANT COMMANDERS.The functional Combatant
Commanders:

   a. Make available subject matter expertise, as appropriate, to support GCCs in the
development of assessments and IDDs for significant security cooperation initiatives.




SECTION 2. RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       10
                                                                DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


    b. Ensure security cooperation activities implemented by functional Combatant Commands
are appropriately assessed and monitored, including by ensuring that appropriate data is entered
into a G-TSCMIS. Conduct evaluations as needed to inform security cooperation management
decisions in compliance with the standards in Paragraph 3.5.

    c. Incorporate relevant evaluation recommendations as outlined in Paragraph 3.5.f. and apply
lessons learned and best practices to make adjustments, as needed, to policy, program, and
resource allocation decisions.

    d. Make relevant source documents available and participate, as appropriate, in support of
the independent evaluations directed by the USD(P).




SECTION 2. RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                      11
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


             SECTION 3: AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS

3.1 GENERAL FRAMEWORK.

    a. DoD AM&E will be consistent with U.S. Government and international standards and
best practices.

     b. DoD will maintain a hybrid approach to management of AM&E efforts, whereby, in
general, assessment and monitoring will be a decentralized effort based on the principles and
guidelines established in this instruction and other directives, policies, and law; and evaluations
at the strategic level will be centralized and overseen by the USD(P).

    c. When possible, DoD should align its AM&E efforts with those of host nation
counterparts, other donors, and implementing partners. This should lessen the overall data-
collection burden and help promote security cooperation effectiveness.

    d. Assessment, monitoring, and evaluation each serve a separate function at distinct points in
the security cooperation planning and implementation cycle (see Figure 1).

   e. AM&E is required for all significant security cooperation initiatives. Such initiatives are
generally led by the GCCs and are often articulated as specific lines of effort in the country-
specific security cooperation sections of a theater campaign plan. Significant security
cooperation initiatives involve the application of multiple security cooperation tools and
programs, which may be overseen and managed by various DoD Components and the
Department of State, over multiple years to realize a country- or region-specific objective or
functional objective (e.g., maritime security or counterterrorism).

    f. Initiatives specifically designated as pilot programs (i.e., testing new concepts and
approaches to security cooperation to assess their effectiveness and applicability to broader
requirements) should be appropriately planned, designed, monitored, and evaluated before being
replicated or expanded.

    g. Accountability and learning are the primary purposes of AM&E and will shape efforts to
leverage security cooperation more effectively in support of defense objectives in the near,
medium, and long terms. AM&E indicates returns on investment, allows policymakers to
identify and improve or eliminate ineffective initiatives, and provides credible information in
support of policy and legislation. AM&E will help DoD understand what security cooperation
methods work and why, and apply lessons learned and best practices to inform security
cooperation resources and policy decisions.




SECTION 3. AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS                                                               12
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


                                  Figure 1. AM&E Framework




3.2. INITIAL ASSESSMENT STANDARDS. Initial assessments are required before all
significant security cooperation initiatives to inform IDDs, and are encouraged before all security
cooperation activities. The initial assessment provides an understanding of the context,
conditions, partner capabilities, and requirements to inform security cooperation planning and
implementation. Assessments identify potential risks to initiative success to help planners
develop risk-mitigation strategies.

    a. Initial assessments describe host nation willingness and propensity to implement and
sustain assistance, improve institutional capacity, and build capabilities in the context of country
or other relevant objectives, and to identify requirements, gaps, and potential risks.

   b. Analysis derived from an initial assessment should directly inform an IDD and related
country plans in appropriate sections. Initial assessments should include the following elements:

       (1) The extent to which an allied or partner nation shares relevant strategic objectives
with the United States, as well as a partner’s current ability to contribute to missions to address


SECTION 3. AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS                                                                13
                                                                   DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


such shared objectives, based on detailed holistic analysis of relevant partner capabilities such as
through application of the doctrine, organizational structure, training, materiel, leadership and
education, personnel, facilities, and policy framework referenced in the Joint Capabilities
Integration and Development System, as established by CJCS Instruction 3170.01I.

      (2) Analysis of potential risks, including assumptions and possible consequences of
implementing and not implementing the initiative, program, or activity.

       (3) Information to inform initiative design, including available contextual data, baselines,
suggested objectives, indicators and milestones, as well as recommendations on what can be
achieved within a given timeframe with anticipated resources.

        (4) Analysis of relevant environmental, economic, political, sociological, cultural, and
other conditions that may directly impact the implementation of the initiative in a specific
country.

        (5) The feasibility of achieving successful outcomes based on a partner’s political
willingness to pursue the desired outcome; its absorptive capacity, including the extent to which
a partner can support, employ, and sustain assistance independently; its political stability; and its
respect for rule of law and human rights.

         (6) Analysis of other related U.S. Government, non-governmental, and international
government organizations, and other stakeholder efforts that are underway or planned, including
how the security cooperation initiative may complement or compete with other programs or
activities.

      (7) Other relevant information, assessments, completed evaluations and related
documents that provide context for the initial assessment process.


3.3. SECURITY COOPERATION IDD STANDARDS. An IDD is required of all significant
security cooperation initiatives. The IDD should be developed through a deliberate and inclusive
process, informed by the opportunities and risks identified in the initial assessment, to create a
comprehensive document. In many cases, consulting the host nation can be helpful in the
development of the IDD.

   a. The IDD should increase the likelihood that security cooperation investments are targeted,
measurable, and effectively implemented. To that end, it provides an overview of the activities
and authorities to be applied in a synchronized manner to achieve the planned security
cooperation outcome. Specifically, IDDs should include:

       (1) Clear linkage to goals or objectives in the theater campaign plan or other higher-level
guidance.

        (2) Problem statement, derived from the initial assessment, which is a clear description
of the issue or challenge the initiative seeks to address. Also known as the rationale, the problem
statement provides the basis and reasons for implementing a security cooperation initiative.



SECTION 3. AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS                                                                 14
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


       (3) A comprehensive performance management section that includes:

           (a) A logic framework for the initiative that maps goals and specific, measurable,
achievable, relevant/results-oriented, and time-bound objectives to the activities necessary to
achieve desired changes. The logic framework visually describes activities and the planned
process of contributing to initiative goals and achieving objectives.

            (b) Indicators and milestones, ideally with baselines and targets, tied to the specific,
measureable, achievable, relevant/results-oriented, and time-bound objectives that quantitatively
or qualitatively measure the outputs and outcomes of the security cooperation initiative toward
achieving stated objectives.

           (c) A theory of change, intended to make implicit assumptions more explicit, which
describes why certain actions will produce a desired change in a given context, and clearly states
what the intended outcome of the initiative will be and how it will be achieved.

        (4) Guidance to relevant stakeholders on how their security cooperation tools and
activities should contribute to the security cooperation initiative and expectations regarding their
role in supporting AM&E efforts. It should also include data-collection details, parameters,
frequency, and responsibility; how results will be used and communicated; and recommendations
on when to evaluate the program.

  b. IDDs should be updated as circumstances change, maintained and retained by the relevant
DoD Component, and shared among initiative and AM&E stakeholders.


3.4. PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING STANDARDS.
Performance monitoring for security cooperation will vary depending on the initiative or activity.
Parameters and expectations for monitoring of indicators or milestones at pre-determined
intervals throughout implementation should be clearly outlined in the performance management
section of the IDD.

   a. Monitoring may be focused at different levels, such as:

       (1) Output monitoring at the implementation level of specific deliverables such as goods
and services to document progress during initiative implementation (e.g., number of training
events delivered). Output monitoring may be particularly useful to program managers and
implementers.

       (2) Outcome monitoring at the leadership or management level of the results of security
cooperation initiatives (e.g., was capacity built based on our training? Did the partner nation
successfully employ the DoD-provided system in support of the intended mission?). Outcome
monitoring may be particularly useful to GCCs and organizations with policy, oversight, and
management responsibilities.

    b. DoD will rely on existing data collection processes managed by DSCA, the GCCs, and
other DoD Components for all security cooperation activities. Data collected for each indicator
should be organized in a systematic way to facilitate analysis and tracking trends to support


SECTION 3. AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS                                                                15
                                                                DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


program-management decisions. Although data should be reported at planned intervals, it may
be modified to reflect the situation on the ground.

   c. Monitoring, which also may include site visits, should also review and identify any
changes in the operational and strategic environment since the initial assessment and identify any
unforeseen challenges that impact initiative execution and implementation.


3.5. EVALUATION STANDARDS.

    a. The USD(P) will maintain an office responsible for leading a centralized effort for
independent evaluations to measure the effectiveness and impact of significant security
cooperation initiatives toward meeting expected outcomes. Evaluations will be primarily
conducted at the strategic level using the appropriate methodology based on context, available
resources, and data. Standards for evaluations will be based on the American Evaluation
Association and the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development. The four principles in Paragraphs 3.5.a. (1) through (4) should
be incorporated into all evaluations conducted by DoD.

       (1) Usefulness: The information, ideas, and recommendations generated by evaluations
should serve a need or answer specific strategic questions for DoD.

        (2) Independence: Evaluators should be able to gather and analyze data and information
freely and follow rigorous and scientifically valid methodologies. All evaluations should be free
from any interference from the commissioning unit or management.

        (3) Methodological and Analytical Rigor: Evaluations should be evidence-based, relying
on verifiable data and information gathered using the standards of professional evaluation
organizations. Both quantitative and qualitative methods can be rigorous and are usually
required to answer evaluation questions.

        (4) Cost Effectiveness: The expected benefits from a security cooperation evaluation
should be a value greater than, or equal to, the resources expended on the evaluation. Cost
effectiveness should also be weighed in determining how the evaluation will be used.

   b. Evaluations of other security cooperation activities may be commissioned by DoD
Components and other stakeholders to improve performance or answer key management
questions. These evaluations should generally follow the standards identified within this section.

   c. Joint or collaborative evaluations are strongly encouraged when they:

       (1) Facilitate mutual learning or reduce costs.

        (2) Are preceded by a memorandum of understanding that outlines costs, expectations,
roles, and responsibilities.

    d. Security cooperation evaluations will follow the internationally and U.S. Government-
recognized ethical standards in dealing with stakeholders and other informants, including:


SECTION 3. AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS                                                              16
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


       (1) Rights of Human Subjects: Evaluations will comply with 32 CFR Part 219 and DoDI
3216.02 to the extent those provisions apply.

       (2) Sensitivity: Evaluators should be sensitive to the gender, beliefs, manners, and
customs of people as well as organizational structures and hierarchies as they conduct their
research in culturally appropriate fashion.

        (3) Privacy and Confidentiality of Information: The privacy and confidentiality of
information should be maintained. If sensitive information is involved, the identity of the
informants must be protected in accordance with the Privacy Act and DoD information policies
as applicable.

        (4) Conflict of Interest: Evaluators should strive to eliminate biases or vested interest in
the evaluation outcomes. Evaluators or contracted firms should recuse themselves from an
evaluation if they played any role in planning or supporting the execution of the program or
could be perceived to benefit from the program being evaluated.

    e. Final evaluation reports should be clear and concise. The reports should be readable and,
as far as possible, the language should be simple, active, familiar, and culturally and politically
sensitive. In accordance with U.S. Government best practices, reports should:

        (1) Include data, findings, conclusions, and recommendations: Such information can be
collected by the evaluators or collected during monitoring. Findings represent the interpretation
of data. Conclusions are the judgments that evaluators make about the initiative’s performance,
outcomes, and impacts based on findings. Recommendations for how future performance could
be improved follow from the findings and conclusions.

      (2) Be organized around evaluation questions, with findings, conclusions, and
recommendations addressing each of the major questions. Reports should include these
elements:

           (a) Executive summary of evaluation.

           (b) Introduction and background.

           (c) Description of program or activity (e.g., including budget, beginning and end
dates).

           (d) Purpose of evaluation.

           (e) Evaluation questions.

           (f) Description of the evaluation design, including data collection methods used,
scope, and methodology.

             (g) A statement about the time period of the evaluation work performance, time spent
in the field, who did the work, and the composition of the team.



SECTION 3. AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS                                                                17
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


           (h) Strengths and limitations of the collected data.

           (i) Conclusions: The overall conclusions synthesize findings from the questions
asked and should be logical inferences based on findings of each question.

            (j) Recommendations: Findings that require corrective action will need a
recommendation directed at management officials who have the authority to act on it.
Recommendations should state what needs to be corrected or achieved without being
prescriptive. They should flow naturally from the findings and conclusions.

           (k) Appendices for additional documents, including evaluation scope of work/terms
of reference.

        (3) Be accompanied by a briefing by the evaluators with key stakeholders to review
results and debrief on evaluation process and procedures.

    f. To promote transparency of DoD’s security cooperation programs, completed evaluations
by the centralized evaluation office will include a separate summary for posting on DoD’s public
website (www.open.defense.gov) unless the USD(P), in consultation with other DoD
Components, determines that disclosure of the summary information could be expected to cause
foreseeable harm to the United States or a partner nation. The summary of the evaluation should
generally be no more than 2-4 pages and should include:

        (1) The title of the evaluation and a brief overview of the programs or activities involved
and relevant context.

       (2) The purpose of the evaluation and questions addressed.

       (3) The methodology used and its scope and limitation.

       (4) Key findings generally organized by evaluation questions.

       (5) Conclusions and, if appropriate, recommendations.

   g. Consistent with AM&E best practices and to promote accountability and the usefulness of
evaluation results, within 30 days of finalizing an evaluation report the relevant stakeholders
should prepare a memorandum responding to the evaluation to the USD(P), indicating:

       (1) Concurrence or non-concurrence in evaluation recommendations (e.g., do the
relevant management officials agree with recommendations outlined in the report and, if not,
why?).

      (2) A plan for compliance with the recommendations (e.g., how will management
implement or act on recommendations from the report? What changes will be made?).

      (3) A timeframe for compliance (e.g., when does management expect the
recommendations to be implemented fully?).




SECTION 3. AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS                                                               18
                                                             DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


      (4) A point of contact for implementing recommendations (e.g., who will be in charge of
implementation?).




SECTION 3. AM&E FRAMEWORK AND STANDARDS                                                         19
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


                                          GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS

AM&E                     assessment, monitoring, and evaluation

CJCS                     Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

DSCA                     Defense Security Cooperation Agency

GCC                      Geographic Combatant Commander
G-TSCMIS                 Global-Theater Security Cooperation Management Information
                         System

IDD                      initiative design document

U.S.C.                   United States Code
USD(P)                   Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


G.2. DEFINITIONS. Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the
purpose of this issuance.

accountability. Obligation to demonstrate, deliver on, and report on what has been achieved in
compliance with agreed rules, policies, and standards.

assessment. Systematic analysis to provide an understanding of the context, conditions, partner
capabilities, and requirements to inform security cooperation planning and implementation.
Assessments are generally conducted in advance of security cooperation activities, but may be
repeated to update analysis and identify mid-course corrections of security cooperation activities.

country-specific security cooperation section. A section of the theater campaign plan in which
the GCCs articulate their intent to apply time, money, and effort through security cooperation
programs in a specific country to further U.S. defense objectives or set the theater for a potential
contingency in their campaign plan. Country-specific security cooperation sections serve as the
core organizing documents for articulating DoD country-level objectives for the application of
security cooperation at the country level, and inform and are informed by corresponding
integrated country strategies. Each country-specific security cooperation section identifies
specific lines of effort that:

   Represent the significant security cooperation initiatives planned for the country.

   Articulate specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and time-bound objectives in support of
such initiatives.

effectiveness. The extent to which a security cooperation initiative has attained its objectives or
intended results.


GLOSSARY                                                                                         20
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


efficiency. A measure of how economically resources (e.g., funds, expertise, time) are used to
achieve results.

evaluation. A systematic collection and analysis of information and evidence about the
characteristics and outcomes of an ongoing or completed initiative, and its design,
implementation, and results. Evaluations determine relevance, value, effectiveness, efficiency,
sustainability, and impact as a basis for improving effectiveness and to inform decision makers
regarding future plans, programs, and activities. Evaluation, distinct from assessment and
monitoring, focuses on documenting the achievement of outcomes and results and in some cases
the value of continuing the investment.

evaluation recommendations. Proposals based on evaluation findings and conclusions that are
aimed at enhancing the effectiveness, efficiency, quality, or processes of a security cooperation
program or activity.

indicator. Quantitative or qualitative factor or variable that provides a simple and reliable
means to measure achievement, to reflect the anticipated changes connected to an intervention,
or to help assess the performance of a security cooperation actor. Two types of indicators are
relevant for security cooperation AM&E efforts:

   Output - good or service delivered.

   Outcome - condition achieved as a result of outputs.

initial assessment. Information collected before or at the start of an initiative that provides a
basis for planning, monitoring, or evaluating subsequent progress or impact.

IDD. A comprehensive document that specifies the specific, measurable, attainable, relevant,
and time-bound objectives, theory of change, and performance management plan for a security
cooperation initiative.

joint evaluations. Joint or collaborative evaluations are evaluations undertaken by two or more
stakeholders involved in a security cooperation initiative, either within DoD or between DoD and
other U.S. Government departments, agencies, or other stakeholders, including the host nation.

milestone. A scheduled event that indicates the completion of a major task of a program.
Milestones are observable and enable the measurement of the progress of a program.

monitoring. A continuous process designed to provide regular feedback on the extent to which
expected outputs and outcomes are being achieved to inform decisions or corrective actions. In
general, results measured in monitoring are the direct and near-term consequences of initiative
activities that provide opportunities to validate the theory of change throughout implementation
and an early indication of the likelihood that expected results will be attained.

objective. A statement of a desired result that meets the criteria of being specific, measurable,
attainable, relevant, and time-bound.




GLOSSARY                                                                                            21
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


output. The direct, tangible results of initiatives. A deliverable or product, good, or service
directly resulting from a security cooperation initiative or activity, such as the number of training
events and the number of unit members trained. These early work products often serve as
documentation of progress during implementation and monitoring.

outcome. The results achieved by initiatives. Some outcomes of interest for security
cooperation are whether partner capability is being built to meet standards, to what extent, and
whether it is achieved within a desired time frame. Three types of outcomes include:

   Short-term. Immediate effects of the initiative or activities often focused on the knowledge
and attitudes of the intended audience.

   Intermediate. Intermediate effects on behavior or normative or policy changes.

    Long-term (also impact). Long-term, cumulative effects of interventions over time on what
they ultimately aim to change (e.g., capabilities, security conditions).

performance management plan. A specific plan to manage the process of monitoring,
evaluating, and analyzing progress toward achieving results over the life of a program.

pilot program. An innovative program conducted on a small scale to examine its model,
implementation, effects, and outcomes to determine whether it should be replicated on a larger
scale or expanded in a different environment.

security cooperation offices. DoD organizations permanently located in foreign countries and
assigned responsibilities for carrying out security cooperation management functions in
accordance with Section 515 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. Security
cooperation offices may include military assistance advisory groups, military missions and
groups, and Offices of Defense and Military Cooperation designated to perform security
cooperation functions. They do not include units, formations, or other ad hoc organizations that
conduct security cooperation activities, such as mobile training and education teams or
operational units.

security cooperation. All DoD interactions with foreign defense establishments to build
relationships that promote specific U.S. security interests, develop allied and partner nation
military and security capabilities for self-defense and multinational operations, and provide U.S.
forces with peacetime and contingency access to allied and partner nations. This also includes
DoD-administered security assistance programs.

security cooperation funding. Allocated funds, including both base and overseas contingency
operations appropriations, to any program or activity that is intended primarily for the purpose of
security cooperation. This category includes programs and activities used to train and equip
partners; provide technical, educational, financial, or humanitarian assistance; conduct military-
to-military or defense civilian contacts, engagements, or exchanges; provide support to
operations conducted by partner nations; and conduct other relevant bilateral and multilateral
activities.




GLOSSARY                                                                                           22
                                                                  DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


    Security cooperation funding does not include programs or activities with a primary purpose
other than security cooperation, even where there are secondary security cooperation benefits,
such as combined exercises or combined training primarily intended to improve U.S. military
readiness. Covered funding is limited to those funds used for incremental execution costs and
program management costs, and do not include costs associated with manning, training, and
equipping force elements used to implement such activities.

significant security cooperation initiative. The series of activities, projects, and programs
planned as a unified, multi-year effort to achieve a single desired outcome or set of related
outcomes. Such initiatives are generally planned by the geographic Combatant Commands and
involve the application of multiple security cooperation tools over multiple years to realize a
country- or region-specific objective or functional objective as articulated in the country-specific
security cooperation sections of a theater campaign plan.

sustainability. The partner country’s ability to maintain capability, capacity, or other results of
a security cooperation intervention at the desired level of effectiveness and efficiency.

theory of change. A statement of expectations regarding the process by which planned
activities will lead to stated objectives. It articulates assumptions and plans about how and why
a set of activities and actions are expected to evolve in the future, including causal linkages
through which early and intermediate outcomes will lead to long-term results.




GLOSSARY                                                                                          23
                                                                         DoDI 5132.14, January 13, 2017


                                             REFERENCES
American Evaluation Association, “Guiding Principles for Evaluators,” July 2004
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3170.01I, “Joint Capabilities Integration and
   Development System (JCIDS),” January 23, 2015
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 32, Part 219
Deputy Secretary of Defense Guidance, “DoD Guidance for Security Coordination,” August 29,
   2016
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,” November 30, 2006
DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” December 8, 1999
DoD Directive 5132.03, “DoD Policy and Responsibilities Relating to Security Cooperation,”
   December 29, 2016
DoD Instruction 3216.02, Protection of Human Subjects and Adherance to Ethical Standards in
   DoD-Supported Research, November 8, 2011
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, “Principles for Evaluating
   Development Assistance,” December 1991
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, “Quality Standards for Development
   Evaluation,” February 2010
Presidential Policy Directive-23, “Security Sector Assistance,” April 5, 2013 1
Public Law 87-195, “United States Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,” September 1961 (as
   amended)
Public Law 111-352, “Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010,”
   January 2011
Public Law 114-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016,” November 2015
United States Agency for International Development, “How To Note: Preparing Evaluation
   Reports,” November 2012
United States Code, Title 10
United States Code, Title 22
United States Code, Title 32
United States Code, Title 50




1
 U.S. Government personnel may review by contacting the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Security Cooperation.



REFERENCES                                                                                                   24
