                             Department of Defense
                                INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 6490.09
                                                                             February 27, 2012
                                                          Incorporating Change 2, April 25, 2017

                                                                                      USD(P&R)

SUBJECT:     DoD Directors of Psychological Health

References: (a) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
            (b) DoD Instruction 1010.10, Health Promotion and Disease Prevention,”
                April 28, 2014
            (c) Department of Defense Task Force on Mental Health, “An Achievable Vision:
                Report of the Department of Defense Task Force on Mental Health,” July
                2007
            (d) Psychological Health and Readiness Council Charter, December 22, 2016


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures to ensure visible
leadership and advocacy for the psychological health and mental health disease and injury
protection of the Military Service members in accordance with the authority in Reference (a) and
the guidance in Reference (b) and section 5.4 of Reference (c).

   b. Designates specific roles for psychological health advocacy at the installation, Military
Departments, and DoD level to provide consultation to operational leadership and facilitate
coordination of clinical, counseling, and other services promoting the psychological health of
Service members and their families.

    c. Designates reporting structures within the DoD to inform enterprise-wide strategic
planning and monitoring of psychological health.

   d. Outlines a uniform psychological health leadership structure for the Reserve Component
(RC) that parallels the Active Component (AC) structure, to ensure that the psychological health
needs of Reservists and National Guard (NG) members and their families are met.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
                                                                 DoDI 6490.09, February 27, 2012

Office of the Inspector General (IG) of the DoD, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that a psychological health and readiness leadership and advocacy
structure, focused on operational readiness and integration of health promotion and clinical
services, shall be established throughout the DoD, and Directors of Psychological Health (DPHs)
shall be designated in key positions across the Military Services, including the RC.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 1.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 2.


6. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Instruction is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles, references, effective date, and plain language for accuracy and to align with
the Psychological Health and Readiness Council (PHRC) Charter.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective February 27, 2012.




Enclosures
   1. Responsibilities
   2. Procedures
Glossary



Change 2, 04/25/2017                              2
                                                               DoDI 6490.09, February 27, 2012

                                       ENCLOSURE 1

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall:

    a. Ensure that DoD Psychological Health and Readiness Council (PHRC) representatives are
designated from:

       (1) Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy (DASD(MPP))
(two representatives: one from MPP and one from the Armed Forces Chaplains Board).

       (2) Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Civilian Personnel Policy (DASD(CPP)).

     (3) Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Community and Family Policy
(DASD(MC&FP)).

   b. Appoint the co-chairs to the DoD PHRC.


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH AFFAIRS (ASD(HA)). The
ASD(HA), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), shall:

   a. Make recommendations through the Medical Personnel Executive Steering Committee
(MEDPERS) to the USD(P&R) regarding the direction and effectiveness of the DPH program
with respect to deployment and clinical mental health objectives.

  b. Direct the Defense Health Agency (DHA) to provide a representative to serve on the DoD
PHRC.

  c. Ensure that the reports and recommendations of the DoD PHRC are relayed through the
MEDPERS to the USD(P&R).


3. DIRECTOR, DHA. The Director, DHA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
ASD(HA), shall:

   a. Assume operational management for policy implementation and monitoring of the DPH
program and development of the DoD PHRC charter.

    b. Incorporate individual, unit, and community psychological health metrics recommended
by the DoD PHRC into regularly reported force health and readiness measures.

   c. Ensure that the charter for the DoD PHRC is fulfilled.



Change 2, 04/25/2017                           3                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 6490.09, February 27, 2012




4. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS
(ASD(M&RA)). The ASD(M&RA), under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P&R), shall:

    a. Ensure that relevant policies for all RC Services are consistent with DPH program policies
established for their respective Active Component.

   b. Appoint a Reserve Forces (RF) DPH.

   c. Direct the RF DPH to serve on the DoD PHRC.


5. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR READINESS (ASD(R)). The ASD(R),
under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), shall:

    a. Ensure that all psychological health policies and procedures required to support force
readiness are addressed and continuously reviewed in this forum.

    b. Ensure that relevant policies concerning force readiness are consistent with DPH program
policies.

   c. Support the appointment of the co-chair as directed by the USD(P&R).


6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

    a. Designate a Service-level DPH and Manpower and Reserve Affairs (M&RA)
representative to work together and monitor the Military Service’s DPH program and report
directly to the appropriate authority as determined by the Secretary of the Military Department
concerned in consultation with the Military Service Surgeon General or, for the Marine Corps,
the Medical Officer of the Marine Corps, and direct such DPH and M&RA designees to serve on
the PHRC.

   b. Within 6 months from the publication date of this Instruction, provide the DoD PHRC
with their strategic plans for establishing visible leadership and advocacy for psychological
health within their respective Departments. The strategic plan will include timelines, milestones,
and a report of progress in meeting the responsibilities and guidelines outlined in this Instruction
and will be updated annually thereafter.

    c. Ensure that each military installation has a designated individual who serves as the
installation’s principal consultant and advocate for psychological health and under the authority
of the installation commander convenes meetings of all installation resources that support
psychological health.



Change 2, 04/25/2017                              4                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 6490.09, February 27, 2012



   d. Ensure coordination among the medical department specialty leaders and consultants and
other military organizations that support psychological health.

   e. Ensure each Service Surgeon General’s annual report to Congress addresses the
psychological health of Service members and their families, and the efforts to improve
psychological health.

    f. Task Military Service IGs to evaluate compliance with Military Service and installation-
level DPH staffing, roles, and functions and with oversight in areas of critical importance to meet
the identified needs of Service members and their families. Military Service IGs must include
subject-matter experts on programs related to psychological health to ensure compliance with the
Military Services’ psychological health strategic plan.

7. CHIEF, NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU (NGB). The Chief, National Guard Bureau, shall:

   a. Appoint an NGB DPH and direct the NGB DPH to serve on the DoD PHRC.

   b. Establish provisions for a council networking all State and territory NG DPHs.


8. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall direct the Joint Staff Surgeon or other designee, and Senior Enlisted Advisor to the
Chairman or other designee to serve on the DoD PHRC.


9. COMMANDERS OF GEOGRAPHIC COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of
geographic Combatant Commands shall:

   a. Ensure strategic plans for delivery of health services support include provisions for
psychological health.

  b. Identify factors that stress the deployed force and refer policy recommendations to the
DoD PHRC via the Joint Staff Surgeon.




Change 2, 04/25/2017                             5                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDI 6490.09, February 27, 2012

                                          ENCLOSURE 2

                                          PROCEDURES


1. GENERAL. The DPH program:

   a. Is a commander’s program providing both consultation to operational leadership on
psychological health issues and vertical integration of Military Service and DoD-wide
psychological health initiatives and population-health monitoring.

   b. Addresses deficits outlined in Reference (c) and:

       (1) Ensures coordination of clinical, counseling, and other services promoting the
psychological health of Service members and their families.

       (2) Ensures that clinical mental health services provided in military treatment facilities
(MTFs) and mental health specialty clinics are integrated with other counseling and supportive
services at the installation level, and from Federal, State, and territory, as well as military and
non-military organizations external to the installation (e.g., Military OneSource, Military and
Family Life Consultants, and TRICARE Network).

        (3) Provides an installation-level leader to coordinate these clinical and counseling
services and resources and to ensure that medical providers and line leaders are aware of the
referral options available for particular psychosocial, spiritual, and family issues.

      (4) Contributes to DoD and Military Service development of a strategic plan for delivery
of comprehensive services to support psychological health.

   c. Promotes the availability of and access to an adequate continuum of care to Active,
Reserve, and NG members.


2. INSTALLATION DPH

    a. Each military installation commander (or comparable activity commander or head, as
determined by the head of the DoD Component involved) shall have a designated individual who
serves as the installation’s principal consultant and advocate for psychological health and under
the authority of the installation commander convenes meetings of all installation or local DoD
resources that support psychological health.

        (1) For purposes of this Instruction, the installation-level psychological health consultant
will be called an “Installation DPH.” However, the Military Services may use existing titles for
the designated individual performing this role.




Change 2, 04/25/2017                              6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 6490.09, February 27, 2012

        (2) The position preferably should be full-time and devoted to developing and
implementing the Military Service’s strategic plan for psychological health; however, at
installations where the mission or tempo is more suited to a part-time position, the roles and
responsibilities of the DPH may be assigned as a significant additional duty.

       (3) The individual may be military, civilian, or a Public Health Service officer as
necessitated by the Military Services’ organizational and operational needs. The DPH must be a
licensed mental health professional.

   b. The responsibilities of the Installation DPH include:

       (1) Apprise the installation commander or local major command of the status of
psychological health in the local beneficiary population, and the degree to which needs for
prevention, early intervention, and treatment are being met.

        (2) Report to the installation commander or local major command and the MTF
commander about the adequacy of staffing and organizational processes and resources needed to
meet the psychological health of the installation, and recommend courses of action to ensure that
services and access to those services are provided throughout the deployment cycle and other
surge situations.

        (3) Ensure coordination of military and non-military services, using existing
coordinating councils where appropriate, between the various programs for Service members and
their families providing support for psychological health, including but not limited to family
advocacy, chaplains, family centers, Casualty Assistance Calls Offices, and TRICARE.

    c. Where different Military Service installations exist in proximity or different Service
components operate at the same installation, the Service DPHs should establish a standing
committee to ensure coordination of services to facilitate equitable coverage and access to care
for all Service members and their families, regardless of Military Service affiliation.


3. MILITARY SERVICE DPHs

   a. Each Military Service shall appoint or designate a Military Service DPH.

   b. Each Military Service’s DPH shall report to the appropriate authority as determined by the
Secretary of the Military Department concerned in consultation with the Military Service
Surgeon General or, for the Marine Corps, the Medical Officer of the Marine Corps.

   c. The Military Service DPH’s responsibilities include:

       (1) Strategic planning and leadership to implement the Military Service’s comprehensive
psychological health strategic plan.




Change 2, 04/25/2017                             7                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 6490.09, February 27, 2012

       (2) Monitor and report on the availability, accessibility, quality, and effectiveness of the
continuum of mental health services provided to Service members and their families.

       (3) Monitor the psychological health of Service members and their families.

      (4) Ensure communication with and between installation DPHs and Reserve component
DPHs to provide guidance, share best practices, and resolve emerging issues.

        (5) Manage the development and coordination, distribution, and effective utilization of
training materials, not to be redundant with training materials produced by DCoE.


4. NG DPH. Under procedures established by the Chief, NGB:

   a. Each Joint Force Headquarters-State shall have a full-time NG DPH to ensure that
psychological health is effectively addressed.

    b. The NGB DPH duties will parallel the duties of the Military Service DPHs described in
section 3 of this enclosure.


5. OTHER RESERVE COMPONENT DPH. For Reserve Components other than the NG:

    a. The RF DPH duties will parallel the duties of the Military Service DPH described in
section 3 of this enclosure.

  b. Each Service RC shall appoint at least one full-time DPH to the staff of the RC Surgeon.
Where Reservists are organized by region, a full-time Regional DPH shall be appointed.


6. DoD PHRC

   a. Co-Chairs. USD(P&R) designees shall serve as Co-Chairs of the DoD PHRC.

    b. Designated Authority. The DoD PHRC shall report to the MEDPERS, and will provide a
briefing to the MEDPERS annually or as necessary.

    c. Meeting Frequency. The DoD PHRC shall meet no less than quarterly commencing not
later than 90 days following issuance of this Instruction.

   d. Responsibilities. The DoD PHRC shall:

       (1) Serve as a central forum for information dissemination, analysis, and integration;
program coordination; and identification of policy gaps and proposed psychological health and
readiness policy across the DoD.




Change 2, 04/25/2017                              8                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                            DoDI 6490.09, February 27, 2012

       (2) Perform additional functions per the PHRC Charter (Reference (d)).

     (3) Include in its membership representatives from the Military Services and DoD
Components in accordance with Reference (d).




Change 2, 04/25/2017                          9                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                          DoDI 6490.09, February 27, 2012

                                       GLOSSARY

                         ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AC                 Active Component
ASD(HA)            Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs
ASD(M&RA)          Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
ASD(R)             Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness

DASD(CPP)          Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Civilian Personnel Policy
DASD(MC&FP)        Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Community and Family
                   Policy
DASD(MPP)          Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy
DCoE               Defense Centers of Excellence
DHA                Defense Health Agency
DPH                Director of Psychological Health

IG                 Inspector General

M&RA               Manpower and Reserve Affairs
MEDPERS            Medical Personnel Executive Steering Committee
MTF                military treatment facility

NG                 National Guard
NGB                National Guard Bureau
NIMH               National Institutes of Mental Health

PHRC               Psychological Health and Readiness Council

RC                 Reserve Component
RF                 Reserve Forces

SAMHSA             Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration

USD(P&R)           Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness

VA                 Department of Veterans Affairs




Change 2, 04/25/2017                         10                                GLOSSARY
