                           Department of Defense
                               DIRECTIVE

                                                                            NUMBER 5250.01
                                                                               January 22, 2013
                                                        Incorporating Change 1, August 29, 2017

                                                                                           USD(I)

SUBJECT:     Management of Intelligence Mission Data (IMD) in DoD Acquisition

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

    a. Establishes policies and assigns responsibilities to provide linkages between the
management, production, and application of DoD IMD under the Under Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence (USD(I)), in accordance with DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01 (Reference (a)), and
accommodation of IMD in the DoD acquisition processes under the Under Secretary of Defense
for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)), in accordance with DoDD 5134.01
(Reference (b)).

    b. Incorporates and cancels DoDD 5250.01 (Reference (c)), continuing the signature support
mission (SSM) as part of IMD management within the DoD consistent with sections 139, 2366,
and 2399 of title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (d)) and title 50, U.S.C. (Reference
(e)).

    c. Establishes a USD(I)-led governance structure to oversee IMD development, production,
and sharing of IMD functional areas including, but not limited to, signatures, electronic warfare
integrated reprogramming (EWIR), order of battle (OOB), system characteristics and
performance (C&P), and geospatial intelligence (GEOINT). The governance structure, as
described in Enclosure 2, also provides a means for examining intelligence support to
acquisition-related issues requiring senior leadership attention.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD
Components”).
                                                               DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013

    b. All acquisition programs and efforts, as defined in DoDD 5000.01 (Reference (f)) and
DoD Instruction 5000.02 (Reference (g)), which are dependent upon IMD in development,
testing, production, or operations.

   c. IMD development, production, and sharing in support of acquisition programs and efforts.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Standardized maintenance and dissemination processes shall be established to achieve the
highest degree of efficiency and effectiveness in response to DoD requirements for IMD as
defined in this Directive, DoDD 5240.01 (Reference (h)), and Director of Central Intelligence
Directive 6/7 (Reference (i)).

    b. Appropriate security regulations shall be followed and classification authority
maintained over all IMD holdings. Disclosure and release shall adhere to Reference (i), DoD
Manual 5200.01 (Reference (j)), DoDD 5230.11 (Reference (k)), and National Disclosure
Policy-1 (Reference (l)) for all IMD and associated metadata submitted for inclusion in DoD data
loads.

    c. Life-cycle mission data plans (LMDPs) shall be established by the program office, or its
predecessor organization, for each IMD-dependent acquisition program and effort beginning at
Milestone A. Acquisition effort IMD dependency shall be identified in accordance with
Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
Memorandum (Reference (m)).

    d. All IMD required for IMD-dependent acquisition programs and efforts shall be produced
by the DoD Intelligence Components unless waivers are coordinated by the USD(I), approved by
the milestone decision authority, and documented in an acquisition decision memorandum.

   e. A standardized and transparent data costing methodology for each functional area shall be
used by all IMD producers.

    f. A risk management process shall be included in DoD acquisition programs to determine
the impact of IMD shortfalls to system capabilities over the life of the program. Results shall
determine if a program’s resourcing plan must include resourcing for additional IMD.

   g. IMD production and collection requirements that can be met by an acquisition program
and are validated by the capability requirements community shall be included in each LMDP.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 3.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                            2
                                                           DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013



6. RELEASABILITY Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMARRY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive: is effective January 22, 2013.




                                             Ashton B. Carter
                                             Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Governance Structure
   3. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 1, 08/29/2017                         3
                                                                          DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013

                                               ENCLOSURE 1

                                               REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)),” October
      24, 2014, as amended
(b)   DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
      Logistics (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended
(c)   DoD Directive 5250.01, “Management of Signature Support Within the Department of
      Defense,” January 31, 2008 (hereby cancelled)
(d)   Title 10, United States Code
(e)   Title 50, United States Code
(f)   DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003, as amended
(g)   DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,”
      January 7, 2015, as amended
(h)   DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(i)   Director of Central Intelligence Directive 6/7, “Intelligence Disclosure Policy (U),”
      April 20, 2001 1
(j)   DoD Manual 5200.01, “DoD Information Security Program,” Volumes 1-4, February 24,
      2012
(k)   DoD Directive 5230.11, “Disclosure of Classified Military Information to Foreign
      Governments and International Organizations,” June 16, 1992
(l)   National Disclosure Policy-1, “National Policy and Procedures for the Disclosure of
      Classified Military Information to Foreign Governments and International Organizations,”
      October 2, 2007 2
(m)   Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
      Memorandum, “Document Streamlining- Program Strategies and Systems Engineering
      Plan,” April 20, 2011 3
(n)   DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(o)   DoD Instruction 8330.01, “Interoperability of Information Technology (IT), Including
      National Security Systems (NSS),” May 21, 2014
(p)   DoD Directive 5100.20, “National Security Agency/Central Security Service (NSA/CSS),”
      January 26, 2010
(q)   DoD Directive 5105.60, “National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA),” July 29, 2009
(r)   DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),”
      December 8, 1999
(s)   DoD Directive 5141.02, “Director of Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E),”
      February 2, 2009



1
  Available to authorized users on SIPRNET from
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/sites/ssc/capco/CAPCO%20Web%20Part%20Pages/DCID-6-7.aspx.
2
  Provided to designated disclosure authorities on a need-to-know basis from the Defense Technology Security
Administration, Office of the USD(P).
3
  Available at http://www.acq.osd.mil/se/docs/PDUSD-ATLMemo-Expected-Bus-Practice-TDS_AS_SEP-
20Apr11.pdf


Change 1, 08/29/2017                                    4                            ENCLOSURE 1
                                                           DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013

(t)   DoD Directive 5105.84, “Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation (DCAPE),”
      May 11, 2012




Change 1, 08/29/2017                         5                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013

                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE


1. PURPOSE OF THE IMD GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE. The purpose of governance is to
provide the DoD intelligence, acquisition, and requirements communities, within their existing
authorities, a forum in which to:

    a. Consult and collaborate on competing and interdependent priorities and issues that impact
risks to capability.

    b. Guide their respective communities to develop a common, rational, and consistent basis
for collective investment and risk mitigation.


2. INTELLIGENCE MISSION DATA SENIOR STEERING GROUP (IMDSSG)

    a. The purpose of the IMDSSG is to influence IMD policy, guidance, and priorities of its
member organizations by raising appropriate IMD issues to senior decision forums, such as the
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) Integration Council, Defense Acquisition
Board, and Joint Requirements Oversight Council.

   b. The membership of the IMDSSG shall be limited to full-time or permanent part-time
Government employees or Service members and shall consist of general or flag officers
(GO/FOs) or civilian equivalent representatives who report directly to the DoD Component
Head. The IMDSSG shall be co-chaired by a representative both the USD(I) and the Director,
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA).

    c. The IMDSSG shall consist of representatives of certain OSD and DoD Components
including, but not limited to:

       (1) USD(I).

       (2) USD(AT&L).

       (3) Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)).

       (4) CJCS.

       (5) Secretaries of the Military Departments.

       (6) Director, DIA.

     (7) Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service.
(DIRNSA/CHCSS).



Change 1, 08/29/2017                           6                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013



       (8) Director, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).

       (9) Director, Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E).

       (10) Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation (DCAPE).

    d. The USD(I) may invite a representative from the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence (ODNI) to participate for the purpose of information exchange on IMD issues.


3. INTELLIGENCE MISSION DATA OVERSIGHT BOARD (IMDOB)

    a. The IMDOB shall address IMD development, production, and sharing issues that arise in
support of DoD acquisition. The IMDOB shall raise appropriate issues and topics to the
IMDSSG. Topics will include, but not be limited to, standardizing architecture and
dissemination methods, data costing, and risk management procedures.

    b. The membership of the IMDOB shall be limited to full-time or permanent part-time
Government employees or Service members and shall consist of GO/FOs or civilian equivalent
representatives. The IMDOB shall be co-chaired by both USD(I) and Director, DIA,
representatives.

    c. The IMDOB shall consist of representatives of OSD and DoD Components including, but
not limited to, those organizations listed in subparagraphs 2.c.(1) through 2.c.(10) of this
enclosure.

    d. The USD(I) may invite an ODNI representative to participate for the purpose of
information exchange on IMD issues.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                           7                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                              DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013

                                       ENCLOSURE 3

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(I). The USD(I), in accordance with Reference (a), shall:

    a. Provide advice and assistance, as appropriate, to the USD(AT&L) concerning acquisition
policy, procedures, and programs that require the development, production, and sharing of IMD.

   b. Oversee DoD development and implementation of intelligence policy, plans, programs,
capabilities, and resources for IMD development, production, and sharing.

   c. Receive assistance for IMD oversight through the governance structure described in
Enclosure 2.

   d. Assign a representative who shall serve as co-chair of the IMDSSG and IMDOB,
described at Enclosure 2.

    e. Represent DoD Intelligence Components’ equities in the development of IMD resourcing
strategies to manage risk to capabilities of acquisition programs.


2. DIRECTOR, DIA. The Director, DIA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I) and in accordance with DoDD 5105.21 (Reference (n)), shall:

   a. Maintain a Signature Support Program to manage and execute the SSM as part of
managing DoD IMD to accomplish the policy objectives of this Directive.

    b. Provide program and mission management for DIA-produced IMD including, but not
limited to, signatures, EWIR, OOB, and C&P for acquisition processes and programs to
accomplish and support the policies of this Directive.

  c. Establish the Intelligence Mission Data Center (IMDC) to assist IMD governance by the
IMDSSG and IMDOB. The IMDC shall:

       (1) Serve as the enterprise focal point for IMD development, production, and sharing.

       (2) Identify common IMD requirements across acquisition programs, efforts, and
operational systems.

        (3) Facilitate discovery and sharing of existing IMD. Advocate and communicate
formats and standards conducive for acquisition use. Assist the USD(I) to ensure data complies
with all DoD policies, including DoDI 8330.01 (Reference (o)).




Change 1, 08/29/2017                           8                       ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013

       (4) Facilitate and coordinate the assessment of LMDPs in support of the IMD producers
and the acquisition process.

       (5) Facilitate examination of IMDOB topics.

   d. Provide IMD, level of data availability, IMD costing, development of data architecture,
formats, compatibility and standards, and dissemination and data management for acquisition
program requirements.

   e. Co-chair the IMDSSG and IMDOB, described at Enclosure 2, and assign representation.

   f. Assist the USD(I) in the preparation of resource strategies to accomplish support under
DIA purview stated in this Directive, including DIA resource requirements.


3. DIRNSA/CHCSS. The DIRNSA/CHCSS, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I) and in accordance with DoDD 5100.20 (Reference (p)), shall:

   a. Provide signals intelligence-related support for IMD production and related IMD for
acquisition processes.

    b. Participate in and provide IMD, level of data availability, IMD costing, development of
data architecture, formats, compatibility and standards, dissemination, and data management for
acquisition program requirements.

   c. Assign appropriate representation to the IMDSSG and IMDOB, described at Enclosure 2.


4. DIRECTOR, NGA. The Director, NGA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I) and in accordance with DoDD 5105.60 (Reference (q)), shall:

   a. Provide program management for GEOINT production in supporting and providing
appropriate IMD for acquisition processes.

    b. Provide GEOINT-related IMD, level of data availability, IMD costing, development of
data architecture, formats, compatibility and standards, dissemination, and data management for
acquisition program requirements.

   c. Assign appropriate representation to the IMDSSG and IMDOB, described at Enclosure 2.


5. USD(AT&L). The USD(AT&L), in accordance with Reference (b), shall:

   a. Ensure each program office or its predecessor organization plans and manages their life-
cycle IMD requirements and address risk of projected shortfalls throughout acquisition and




Change 1, 08/29/2017                           9                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013

sustainment. The risk management process and planning shall begin prior to Milestone A in
concert with the analysis of alternatives and the initiation of an LMDP.

    b. Ensure that requirements and program needs for IMD are addressed by the program
manager in program development, testing, fielding, operation, and sustainment of required
weapons, smart munitions, sensors, and systems capabilities. IMD-dependent programs shall
incorporate the status, risk summary, and, when applicable, the funding for any projected IMD
shortfalls into the technology development strategy or acquisition strategy, as appropriate for the
respective milestone, for both development and life-cycle support.

   c. Assign appropriate representation to the IMDSSG and IMDOB, described at Enclosure 2.

    d. Represent DoD Acquisition Community equities in the development of IMD resourcing
strategies to manage risk to capabilities of acquisition programs.


6. USD(P). The USD(P), in accordance with DoDD 5111.1 (Reference (r)), shall assign
appropriate representation to the IMDSSG and IMDOB, described at Enclosure 2, to address
foreign disclosure of IMD topics.


7. DOT&E. The DOT&E, in accordance with DoDD 5141.02 (Reference (s)), shall:

    a. Consider the adequacy of IMD in determining an acquisition system’s operational
effectiveness, suitability, and survivability.

   b. Assign appropriate representation to the IMDSSG and IMDOB, described at Enclosure 2.


8. DCAPE. The DCAPE, in accordance with DoDD 5105.84 (Reference (t)), shall assign
appropriate representation to the IMDSSG and IMDOB to provide independent advice on IMD
costing methodologies.


9. CJCS. The CJCS shall:

   a. Assign appropriate representation to the IMDSSG and IMDOB.

   b. Provide independent advice on DoD Requirements Community equities.


10. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

   a. Participate in the development of data architecture, formats, compatibility and standards,
and dissemination and data management for IMD acquisition program requirements.



Change 1, 08/29/2017                            10                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013



   b. Ensure that Military Service Intelligence Production Centers provide IMD, level of data
availability, and IMD production costing for IMDC, acquisition, and operational use.

    c. Provide collected or produced non-DoD data, developed in accordance with paragraph
4.d. of this Directive, to IMD producers in order to optimize the sharing of information. This
includes contractor-produced data to be provided to the DoD for Government use and for sharing
with other program offices.

   d. Ensure that program needs for IMD, including U.S., allied, or coalition mission data, are
addressed by the program manager in program development and during testing, fielding,
operation, sustainment, and maintenance of systems.

    e. For Military Service programs, ensure program management offices work with their
Component-level requirements and resource managers to articulate program needs and pursue a
resourcing strategy to obtain required IMD not currently available from the DoD Intelligence
Components.

   f. Assign appropriate representation to the IMDSSG and the IMDOB, as described at
Enclosure 2.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                           11                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                             DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013

                                        GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


C&P               characteristics and performance
CJCS              Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


DCAPE             Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
DIA               Defense Intelligence Agency
DIRNSA/CHCSS      Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
DoDD              DoD Directive
DOT&E             Director, Operational Test and Evaluation


EWIR              electronic warfare integrated reprogramming


GEOINT            geospatial intelligence
GO/FO             general or flag officer


IMD               intelligence mission data
IMDC              Intelligence Mission Data Center
IMDOB             Intelligence Mission Data Oversight Board
IMDSSG            Intelligence Mission Data Senior Steering Group


ISR               intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance

LMDP              life-cycle mission data plan


NGA               National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency


ODNI              Office of the Director of National Intelligence
OOB               order of battle


SSM               signature support mission


U.S.C.            United States Code
USD(AT&L)         Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics


Change 1, 08/29/2017                          12                         GLOSSARY
                                                                 DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013


USD(I)               Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)               Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this Instruction.

C&P. All-source derived assessments of foreign military system capabilities and physical
attributes.

combat identification. The process of attaining an accurate characterization of detected objects
in the battle space to the extent that high confidence, timely application of tactical military
options, and weapons resources can occur.

EWIR data. All-source derived data describing observed and assessed radio frequency
parametric data. The EWIR database includes threat, neutral military, and friendly and
commercial system mission data.

GEOINT. Defined in Reference (q).

IMD. DoD intelligence used for programming platform mission systems in development,
testing, operations, and sustainment including, but not limited to, the functional areas of
signatures, EWIR, OOB, C&P, and GEOINT.

IMD-dependent programs. Any acquisition programs that will require IMD (e.g., programs that
carry out combat identification, ISR, and targeting using, but not limited to, signatures, EWIR,
OOB, C&P and GEOINT.)

IMD management. The management of mission data production and costing, storage,
maintenance, and dissemination processes to achieve the highest degree of efficiency and
effectiveness in response to validated DoD requirements.

LMDP. A statement of program needs that is applied throughout the life of an IMD-dependent
acquisition program and potentially influences programmatic decisions based on the availability
of IMD over the life of the program.

OOB. The identification, command structure, strength, and disposition of personnel, equipment,
and units of an armed force.

risk management. The process that identifies, analyzes, and mitigates risks to capabilities due to
gaps in IMD availability.

signature. A distinctive characteristic or set of characteristics that consistently recurs and
identifies a piece of equipment, material, activity, individual, or event such as a radio frequency
or acoustic characteristics.


Change 1, 08/29/2017                             13                            GLOSSARY
                                                             DoDD 5250.01, January 22, 2013



SSM. The life-cycle management of standardizing the signatures collection, processing,
development, storage, maintenance, and dissemination processes to achieve the highest degree of
efficiency and effectiveness in meeting DoD operational signature requirements. Includes the
provision of a single access point for each security domain for all DoD signatures within the
DoD signatures pool.




Change 1, 08/29/2017                          14                           GLOSSARY
