                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION
                                                                           NUMBER 1005.14
                                                                              January 10, 2013
                                                         Incorporating Change 2, April 28, 2022

                                                                                         DA&M

SUBJECT:     Department of Defense Spirit of Hope (SOH) Award

References: See Enclosure 1.


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in References (a) through (c) and the guidance
in Reference (d), this Instruction:

   a. Establishes the DoD SOH Award.

   b. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for the DoD SOH Award.

   c. Prescribes requirements and procedures for nominating and awarding recipients.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
U.S. Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland
Security by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Joint Staff (JS), the Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this Instruction as the “DoD
Components”). For the purposes of this Instruction, “Components concerned” refers collectively
to Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and JS, Office of Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, and the DoD Field Activities.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. The DoD SOH Award will be presented annually to recognize those who:

        (1) Epitomize the values of Bob Hope: duty, honor, courage, loyalty, commitment,
integrity, and selfless dedication.
                                                                 DoDI 1005.14, January 10, 2013



       (2) Significantly enhance the quality of life of Service members and their families
serving around the world.

       (3) Selflessly contribute an extraordinary amount of time, talent, or resources to benefit
Service members.

   b. The DoD SOH Award will only be awarded when the standards in paragraph 4a are met.
Nominees may not be selected to receive the award if they do not meet the criteria and eligibility
requirements in this Instruction.

    c. The DoD SOH Award will be presented annually to one recipient nominated and selected
by each of the following: the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, U.S. Coast Guard, and
Components concerned.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3 for criteria and eligibility requirements, selection, and
presentation of the DoD SOH Award.


7. INFORMATION COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS. The DoD SOH Award application,
referred to in paragraph 4.b. of Enclosure 3 of this Instruction, is exempt from licensing in
accordance with paragraph C4.4.9. of DoD 8910.1-M (Reference (e)).


8. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change is administrative and, in accordance with the
March 21, 2022 Washington Headquarters Services Memorandum (Reference (f))

    a. Reassigns the Director of Administration, Office of the Deputy Chief Management
Officer of the Department of Defense responsibilities and duties to the Director of
Administration and Management (DA&M) in accordance with Section 901 of Public Law 116-
283 (Reference (g)), which eliminated the position of the Deputy Chief Management Officer of
the Department of Defense effective January 1, 2021, and Reference (b) and the January 11,
2021 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (h)), which implemented Reference
(g) and reestablished the DA&M.

   b. Updates organizational titles and references for accuracy.




Change 2, 04/28/2022                            2
                                                           DoDI 1005.14, January 10, 2013

10. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective January 10, 2013.




                                            Michael L. Rhodes
                                            Director of Administration and Management

Enclosures
   1. Responsibilities
   2. DoD SOH Award Selection and Presentation
Glossary




Change 2, 04/28/2022                        3
                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES

(a) DoD Directive 5105.53, “Director of Administration and Management (DA&M),” February
    26, 2008
(b) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Re-establishment of the Assistant to the
    Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Oversight and the Director of Administration and
    Management,” January 11, 2021
(c) Office of the Secretary of Defense, Director of Administration and Management Action
    Memo, “Authority to Establish the Spirit of Hope (SOH) Department of Defense Instruction
    (DoDI),” April 18, 2011
(d) DoD Instruction 1400.25, Volume 451, “DoD Civilian Personnel Management System:
    Awards,” November 4, 2013
(e) DoD Manual 8910.01, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for DoD Internal
    Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
(f) Washington Headquarters Services Memorandum, “Approval of Administrative Changes to
    Office of the Director of Administration and Management (ODA&M) DoD Issuances, Phase
    2,” March 21, 2022
(g) Public Law 116-283, “William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for
    Fiscal Year 2021,” January 1, 2021
(h) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Disestablishment of the Chief Management
    Officer of the DoD and Realignment of Functions and Responsibilities,” January 11, 2021




Change 2, 04/28/2022                     4                           ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDI 1005.14, January 10, 2013

                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT (DA&M). The DA&M:

  a. Establishes policy, assign responsibilities, and prescribe procedures for the DoD SOH
Award.

   b. Oversees the implementation of this Instruction.

  c. Serves as the approval authority for nominations from the Components concerned for the
DoD SOH Award.

   d. Serves as the Awards Presentation Authority for the Components concerned in accordance
with section 5 of Enclosure 3.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). Under the authority, direction,
and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, when a foreign national is
selected for the DoD SOH Award, the Director, DIA:

    a. Reviews the selection, verifies that counterintelligence records checks have been
conducted, and conducts a biographic file check to ensure the foreign national has committed no
act or engaged in any activity wherein the awarding of the DoD SOH Award would cause
embarrassment to the United States.

    b. Provides a statement of concurrence or nonconcurrence to the DoD Component that
selected the foreign national for the DoD SOH award.


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS AND COMMANDANT OF THE
U.S. COAST GUARD. The Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Commandant of the
U.S. Coast Guard, or their representatives:

    a. In accordance with Enclosure 3 of this Instruction, serve as approval authorities for their
selection(s) of DoD SOH Award recipients.

         (1) The Secretary of the Navy is the approval authority for the Navy and the Marine
Corps.

       (2) The Commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard is the approval authority for the U.S.
Coast Guard.

   b. Serve as Awards Presentation Authority in accordance with section 5 of Enclosure 3.



Change 2, 04/28/2022                         5                             ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 1005.14, January 10, 2013

                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                   DoD SOH AWARD SELECTION AND PRESENTATION


1. SELECTION CRITERIA

    a. The DoD SOH Award will be presented annually to one recipient nominated and selected
by each of the following: the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, U.S. Coast Guard, and
Components concerned. The award recipient may be either an individual or an organization.

   b. The recipient must:

        (1) Epitomize the values of Bob Hope: duty, honor, courage, loyalty, commitment,
integrity, and selfless dedication.

       (2) Significantly enhance the quality of life of Service members and their families
serving around the world.

       (3) Selflessly contribute an extraordinary amount of time, talent, or resources to benefit
Service members.


2. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS

    a. DoD SOH Recipients. Private citizens or organizations and current or former DoD
military or civilian personnel are eligible to receive the award.

   b. DoD Contractors. Individuals or organizations having a commercial or profit-making
contractual relationship with DoD or with a DoD Component may be eligible to receive the
award if:

        (1) The contribution is clearly and substantially outside what is specified or implied
within the terms of the contract establishing the relationship.

       (2) The recognition is clearly in the public interest.

     c. Foreign Nationals. Before approval of the award, the DoD Component or the commander
initiating the recommendation for an award to a foreign national:

       (1) Coordinates with the appropriate U.S. Embassy to ensure that the award is consistent
with the overall interests of the United States.

        (2) Requests that the pertinent military counterintelligence organization conduct a
counterintelligence records check to ensure foreign national has no known involvement with
international terrorism or foreign intelligence services.



Change 2, 04/28/2022                         6                             ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1005.14, January 10, 2013



      (3) In accordance with section 2 of Enclosure 2, requests that DIA review the DoD SOH
recommendation of all foreign nationals.

   d. Posthumous Awarding. The award may be presented posthumously.


3. PERIOD OF SERVICE. The annual award recognizes a period of service from January 1
through December 31 of the calendar year preceding each award ceremony. A multi-year or
lifetime contribution may also be recognized.


4. SELECTION PROCESS

   a. The approval authorities will establish internal procedures to solicit, review, and select
DoD SOH Award recipients and will forward the award recipient’s packet to the Awards
Presentation Authority no later than June 30 of each calendar year.

   b. Each award recipient’s packet includes:

       (1) Name of the nominee, group, or organization.

       (2) Nominee’s address.

       (3) Nominee’s present position and/or status.

       (4) If applicable, name and address of nominee’s employer during the period of service.

        (5) A summary, not to exceed two double-spaced pages with at least 12-pitch font, of the
act(s) or service(s) rendered and how the nominee epitomizes the values of Bob Hope as
described in paragraph 4.a. above the signature of this Instruction.

       (6) Supporting documentation (optional).

        (7) A proposed citation, not to exceed 90 words, that provides specific examples of the
act(s) or service(s) performed.

       (8) Name, address, and telephone number of the point of contact for the nominating
organization.

       (9) For foreign national selectees, a statement of concurrence by the U.S. Chief of
Mission and the U.S. Defense Attaché (if one is assigned) to the country of the foreign national
nominee; and a statement of concurrence from the Director, DIA.

    c. If approval authorities accept nominations from the public, all regulatory rule and public
collection processes must be followed in accordance with applicable executive and legislative



Change 2, 04/28/2022                         7                             ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1005.14, January 10, 2013

requirements. Nominations from the public include but are not limited to those submitted by
separated military, former Federal civilians, foreign nationals, private citizens or organizations,
contractors, and State, tribal, or local governments.


5. AWARDS PRESENTATION

   a. The position of the Awards Presentation Authority will rotate between Military
Departments, U.S. Coast Guard, and OSD, beginning with the Navy in 2013 and followed by Air
Force, U.S. Coast Guard, OSD, and Army.

   b. The Awards Presentation Authority:

       (1) Is designated as indicated in paragraphs 1d and 3b of Enclosure 2 to serve on an
annual basis.

      (2) Plans and hosts an annual DoD SOH awards ceremony at the Pentagon, typically in
October or November.




Change 2, 04/28/2022                          8                             ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                  DoDI 1005.14, January 10, 2013

                                            GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


 DA&M                         Director of Administration and Management
 DIA                          Defense Intelligence Agency


 JS                           Joint Staff


 SOH                          Spirit of Hope

                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this Instruction.

approval authority. Military Secretary, Commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard, and DA&M (for
the Components concerned) respectively approving their recipient(s) for the DoD SOH award.
Each may have one recipient (individual or organization). The Secretary of the Navy will have
two recipients (one individual or organization from the Navy and one individual or organization
from the Marine Corps).

Awards Presentation Authority. The DoD Component planning and hosting an annual DoD
SOH awards ceremony. Responsibilities will rotate between Military Departments, U.S. Coast
Guard, and OSD.

Components concerned. Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and JS, Office of the
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, DoD Field Activities




Change 2, 04/28/2022                           9                              GLOSSARY
