                            Department of Defense
                              INSTRUCTION

                                                                             NUMBER 3020.39
                                                                                  March 2, 2015
                                           Incorporating Change 2, Effective September 21, 2020

                                                                                        USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:      Mission Assurance Policy for the Defense Intelligence Enterprise (DIE)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This instruction:

    a. Reissues and renames DoD Instruction (DoDI) 3020.39 (Reference (a)) in accordance
with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01 (Reference (b)) to update established
policy, assign responsibilities, and provide guidance for integrated mission assurance for the DIE
pursuant to DoDD 3020.26, DoDI 3020.42, DoDD 3020.44, and DoDD 3020.40 (References (c)
through (f), respectively).

   b. Amplifies guidance in References (c), (d), (e), and (f) as well as DoD S-3020.26-P
(Reference (g)) and the DoD Mission Assurance Strategy (Reference (h)) for the coordination of
programs, plans, and capabilities:

       (1) Across the DIE.

       (2) Within the DoD.

        (3) With the Intelligence Community (IC) through the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence (ODNI).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD
Components”).

   b. Specifically, the DIE as defined in the Glossary.
                                                                    DoDI 3020.39, March 2, 2015



3. POLICY. It is DoD policy to:

    a. Develop, implement, and oversee policies, programs, and guidance in coordination with
the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)), DoD Component
heads, and the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) to achieve an integrated approach to
addressing all threats and all hazards in order to continually provide DIE capabilities to support
the President, Secretary of Defense, DNI, and warfighting components of the DoD.

    b. Take actions to achieve mission resilience and to ensure the continuation of essential
functions and assets, including personnel, equipment, facilities, networks, information,
infrastructure, and supply chains, so that DIE critical missions can be conducted under all
conditions and across the spectrum of threats and hazards.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the USD(I&S) in accordance with Public Law 116-92
(Reference (i)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective March 2, 2015.




                                                  Michael G. Vickers
                                                  Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 2, 09/21/2020                             2
                                                                            DoDI 3020.39, March 2, 2015


                                             ENCLOSURE 1

                                              REFERENCES

(a)   DoD Instruction 3020.39, “Integrated Continuity Program for the Defense Intelligence
      Enterprise (DIE),” September 12, 2008 (hereby cancelled)
(b)   DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
      (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(c)   DoD Directive 3020.26, “DoD Continuity Policy,” February 14, 2018
(d)   DoD Instruction 3020.42, “Defense Continuity Plan Development,” February 17, 2006
(e)   DoD Directive 3020.44, “Defense Crisis Management,” June 4, 2007, as amended
(f)   DoD Directive 3020.40, “Mission Assurance (MA)”, November 29, 2016, as amended
(g)   DoD S-3020.26-P, “Department of Defense Headquarters Continuity Plan (U),”
                     1
      March 21, 2007
(h)   DoD Mission Assurance Strategy, April 2012
(i)   Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,”
      December 20, 2019
(j)   DoD Instruction 3020.47, “DoD Participation in the National Exercise Program (NEP),”
      January 29, 2019
(k)   Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3500.01H, “Joint Training Policy for the Armed
      Forces of the United States,” April 25, 2014




1
 This document is classified and may be obtained by authorized users on the SIPRNET DoD Issuances Web Site at
http://www.dtic.smil.mil/whs/directives.


Change 2, 09/21/2020                                  3                            ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDI 3020.39, March 2, 2015


                                       ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


 1. USD(I&S). Pursuant to Reference (b), the USD(I&S):

   a. Develops and oversees policy and guidance for DIE mission assurance in coordination
with DoD Component heads and the DNI.

   b. Oversees policy and guidance for DIE support to:

       (1) DoD crisis management in accordance with Reference (e).

       (2) DoD continuity programs in accordance with References (c) and (g).

       (3) The Intelligence Sector of the Defense Critical Infrastructure Program in accordance
with Reference (f).

   c. Represents the DIE to the DoD Mission Assurance Coordination Boards:

       (1) Mission Assurance Executive Steering Group.

       (2) Mission Assurance Senior Steering Group.

       (3) Sub-working groups, as designated.


2. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE MISSION ASSURANCE OFFICE (DIMAO).
Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), the Director, DIMAO:

    a. Leads the office of primary responsibility (OPR) for the development and coordination
of mission assurance policies and guidance within the DIE and with interagency,
departmental, and IC counterparts.

    b. Coordinates with the DoD Components that are part of the DIE and the ODNI
National Intelligence Emergency Management Activity (NIEMA) on the identification,
validation, and programming for mission assurance-related requirements and solutions,
especially those that are applicable across the DIE.

    c. Coordinates with the DoD Components that are part of the DIE and the ODNI NIEMA, IC
Exercise Forum (ICEF), on mission assurance-related exercise planning and exercise
participation among these DoD Components and with IC partners in accordance with DoDI
3020.47 (Reference (j)) and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3500.01G
(Reference (k)).




Change 2, 09/21/2020                            4                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 3020.39, March 2, 2015



3. DOD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads ensure that the officials within
their Components with responsibility for DIE matters:

   a. Plan and program for the continuous, assured performance of primary mission-essential
functions (PMEFs) in support of the national essential functions (NEFs).

   b. Plan and program for the continuation or resumption of mission-essential support to DoD,
DIE, and IC mission partners.

     c. Coordinate, as applicable, DIE mission assurance related plans, requirements, and
initiatives with the Office of the USD(I&S) and the ODNI to ensure integrated DIE mission
assurance capabilities within the DoD Components and with the IC.

    d. Employ national, departmental, IC, and DoD Component-level exercises to assess and
validate mission assurance capabilities, programs, and plans. Forecast, coordinate, and plan
mission assurance exercises and exercise activity with the DIMAO and the ODNI NIEMA,
ICEF.

    e. Conduct or leverage relevant assessments to validate the completeness, readiness, and
effectiveness of mission assurance programs, plans, and capabilities.

   f. Designate an OPR for mission assurance policy, programs, and plans.




Change 2, 09/21/2020                           5                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                      DoDI 3020.39, March 2, 2015


                                                GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CI            counterintelligence


DIE           Defense Intelligence Enterprise
DIMAO         Defense Intelligence Mission Assurance Office
DNI           Director of National Intelligence
DoDD          DoD directive
DoDI          DoD instruction


IC            Intelligence Community
ICEF          Intelligence Community Exercise Forum


MEF           mission-essential function


NEF           national essential function
NIEMA         National Intelligence Emergency Management Activity


PMEF          primary mission-essential function


ODNI          Office of the Director of National Intelligence
OPR           office of primary responsibility


USD(I&S)      Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.


continuity of government. Defined in Reference (c).

Defense Critical Infrastructure Program. Defined in Reference (f).

Defense Intelligence. The integrated departmental intelligence that covers the broad aspects of
national policy and national security and that intelligence relating to capabilities, intentions, and


Change 2, 09/21/2020                              6                             GLOSSARY
                                                                     DoDI 3020.39, March 2, 2015


activities of foreign powers, organizations, or persons, including any foreign military or military-
related situation or activity that is significant to Defense policy-making or the planning and
conduct of military operations and activities. Defense Intelligence includes Active and Reserve
military, strategic, operational, and tactical intelligence.

DIE. The organizations, infrastructure, and measures to include policies, processes, procedures,
and products of the Intelligence, Counterintelligence (CI), and Security Components of the Joint
Staff, Combatant Commands, Military Departments, and other DoD elements that perform
National Intelligence, Defense Intelligence, intelligence-related, CI, and security functions, as
well as those organizations under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S).

Intelligence Sector. Defined in Reference (f).

mission assurance. Actions taken to achieve mission resiliency and ensure the continuation of
MEFs and assets, including personnel, equipment, facilities, networks, information,
infrastructure, and supply chains, so that the DIE can conduct its critical missions under all
conditions and across the spectrum of threats and hazards. Mission assurance will evolve to
meet organizational and mission needs but typically will encompass those programs related to
the national preparedness elements of prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery.

mission assurance programs. To align with the DoD Mission Assurance Strategy and
Implementation Framework, mission assurance programs include: critical infrastructure
protection; continuity of operations; emergency preparedness and emergency management; anti-
terrorism and force protection; physical security; cybersecurity; information technology; disaster
recovery; and chemical, biological radiological, nuclear, and explosive programs.

MEFs. The specified or implied tasks required to be performed by, or derived from, statute,
Executive order, or other appropriate guidance, and those organizational activities that must be
performed under all circumstances to achieve DoD Component missions or responsibilities in a
continuity threat or event. Failure to perform or sustain these functions would significantly
affect the DoD’s ability to provide vital services or exercise authority, direction, and control.

NEFs. The functions that are necessary to lead and sustain the United States during a
catastrophic emergency and that, therefore, must be supported through continuity of operations
and continuity of government capabilities.

PMEFs. Those organizational MEFs which must be performed in order to support the
performance of NEFs before, during, and in the aftermath of an emergency. PMEFs need to be
continuously performed or resumed within 12 hours after an event and maintained for up to 30
days or until normal operations can be resumed.

resilience. The characteristic or capability to maintain functionality and structure (or degrade
gracefully) in the face of internal and external change.

response. Immediate actions to save lives, protect property and the environment, and meet basic
human needs after an incident has occurred.



Change 2, 09/21/2020                             7                             GLOSSARY
