                                Department of Defense

                               INSTRUCTION
                                                                            NUMBER 3210.7
                                                                                 May 14, 2004
                                                      Incorporating Change 1, October 15, 2018



                                                                                      USD(R&E)

SUBJECT: Research Integrity and Misconduct

References: (a) DoD Directive 3216.2, "Protection of Human Subjects and Adherence to Ethical
                Standards in DoD-Supported Research," March 25, 2002
            (b) Federal Register, Volume 65, page 76262, December 6, 2000, "Federal Policy
                on Research Misconduct" current edition
            (c) Title 32, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 22, "DoD Grant and Agreement
                Regulations (DoDGARs)," current edition
            (d) Title 48, Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter 2, "Defense Federal Acquisition
                Regulation Supplement (DFARS)," current edition
            (e) through (h), see enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction supplements the policy established by paragraph 4.8. of reference (a) and
implements subparagraph 5.1.5. of reference (a) by specifying detailed procedures and standards
for the Department of Defense for the prevention of research misconduct. This Instruction is
consistent with the "Federal Policy on Research Misconduct" (reference (b)), which calls upon
those Federal Agencies that support or conduct research on an intramural or extramural basis to
issue policies and procedures that conform to the Federal policy.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

This Instruction applies to:

     2.1. The Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities
and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to
collectively as "the DoD Components").
                                                                        DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004


     2.2. All allegations of research misconduct (as defined in enclosure 2) by performers or
reviewers of research (also as defined in enclosure 2) or advanced technology development
activities that use DoD resources, including:

          2.2.1. Civilian and military employees of the DoD Components;

          2.2.2. Employees of non-Federal entities that receive DoD funding through
procurement contracts, grants, cooperative agreements, or other funding instruments, under the
terms of those instruments;

          2.2.3. Individual consultants, under the terms of their appointments; and

           2.2.4. Individuals other than DoD employees participating in research activities
conducted by the DoD Components or under their auspices, including proposal reviewers not
covered under subparagraphs 2.2.2. or 2.2.3., individuals under special personnel appointments,
and visiting scientists, under the terms of the instruments that establish their relationship with the
Department of Defense.


3. DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this Instruction are defined in enclosure 2.


4. POLICY

Consistent with the objective of reference (b) to ensure public trust in the research enterprise, the
DoD Components shall promote the integrity of research conducted under their purview. The
DoD Components shall establish procedures to foster integrity in research activities and to
respond to allegations of research misconduct consistent with applicable laws and regulations.


5. PROCEDURES

Guidance for implementation of this Instruction by the DoD Components is provided in
enclosure 3. The guidance addresses requirements that pertain to research institutions in general,
as well as specific requirements for intramural research institutions. Enclosure 4 specifies the
requirements to be implemented in the DoD Grant and Agreement Regulations and the Defense
Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (references (c) and (d)) for inclusion in applicable
contracts, other acquisition instruments, grants, and agreements.




Change 1, 10/15/2018                              2
                                                                       DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004



6. RESPONSIBILITIES

    6.1. The Director, Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E), under the Under
Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics) (USD(AT&L)):

          6.1.1. Shall amend reference (c) to implement the requirements of this Instruction for
extramural research institutions. Amendments to reference (c) shall be proposed in the Federal
Register for public comment within 270 days of the effective date of this Instruction.

          6.1.2. Shall be the central point of contact within the Department of Defense for policy
matters relating to research misconduct and interpretation of this Instruction.

        6.1.3. Shall act as the principal DoD liaison with Federal Agencies outside the
Department of Defense on matters pertaining to research misconduct.

       6.1.4. Shall establish a committee consisting of representatives from the DoD
Components to assist in the implementation and maintenance of this Instruction.

          6.1.5. May issue DoD instructions or other guidance necessary to implement this
Instruction.

          6.1.6. May grant exceptions to requirements of this Instruction, if they are consistent
with law and justified by special circumstances.

           6.1.7. May specify periodic or ad hoc reporting requirements, including any required
to obtain information to respond to inquiries by the Office of Science and Technology Policy.

         6.1.8. Shall coordinate with the Director of Defense Procurement and Acquisition
Policy (DDPAP) in matters relating to contracts and other acquisition instruments.

         6.1.9. In coordination with the DDPAP, shall propose changes to reference (d) to
implement the requirements of this Instruction for contracts and other transactions with
extramural research institutions for presentation to the Defense Acquisition Regulation Council.
Changes to reference (d) shall be proposed in the Federal Register for public comment within
270 days of the effective date of this Instruction.

     6.2. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

          6.2.1. Develop, issue, and monitor implementing policies and procedures to ensure
compliance with this Instruction and applicable DoDGARs and DFARS requirements (references
(c) and (d)).

           6.2.2. Ensure that authorities and responsibilities under this Instruction are delegated
to levels of command or authority that allow responses to allegations of research misconduct to


Change 1, 10/15/2018                              3
                                                                      DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004


be handled at an appropriate organizational level consistent with the requirements of this
Instruction.

          6.2.3. For allegations of research misconduct that involve more than one DoD
Component or a DoD Component(s) and a non-DoD Federal entity, jointly determine and assign
executive responsibility for compliance.

           6.2.4. Maintain adequate documentation of all responses to allegations of research
misconduct conducted by a headquarters-level DoD Component or by an intramural research
institution.

         6.2.5. Establish procedures to ensure timely response to DDR&E reporting
requirements.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this Instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (reference (e)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




Enclosures - 4
  E1. References, continued
  E2. Definitions
  E3. Requirements for DoD Components' Research Misconduct Procedures
  E4. Requirements for Extramural Research Institutions




Change 1, 10/15/2018                            4
                                                                  DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004

                                    E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                                 REFERENCES, continued


(e) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary of
    Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(f) Section 2409 of title 10, United States Code, "Contractor Employees: Protection from
    Reprisal for Disclosure of Certain Information"
(g) Section 552 of title 5, United States Code, "Freedom of Information Act"
(h) Section 552a of title 5, United States Code, "Privacy Act"




Change 1, 10/15/2018                          5                               ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                       DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004

                                       E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                                          DEFINITIONS



     E2.1.1. Adjudication. The stage in the response to an allegation of research misconduct
when the outcome of the investigation is reviewed, and appropriate corrective actions, if any, are
determined. Corrective actions generally will be administrative in nature (e.g., termination of an
award(s), debarment, special approvals, or correction of the research record); however if there is
an indication of violation of civil or criminal statutes, civil or criminal sanctions may be pursued.

     E2.1.2. Fabrication. Making up data or results and recording or reporting them.

     E2.1.3. Falsification. Manipulating research materials, equipment, or processes, or
changing or omitting data or results such that the research is not accurately represented in the
research record.

     E2.1.4. Finding of Research Misconduct. The conclusion proven by a preponderance of the
evidence that there was research misconduct and that such misconduct represented a significant
departure from accepted practices of the relevant research community and has been committed
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly.

     E2.1.5. Inquiry. The stage in the response to an allegation of research misconduct when an
assessment is made to determine whether the allegation has substance and an investigation is
warranted.

     E2.1.6. Investigation. The stage in the response to an allegation of research misconduct
when the factual record is formally developed and examined to determine whether to dismiss the
case, recommend for a finding of research misconduct, and/or take other appropriate remedies.

    E2.1.7. Plagiarism. The appropriation of another person's ideas, processes, results, or
words without giving appropriate credit.

     E2.1.8. Research. All basic, applied, and demonstration research in all fields of science,
engineering, and mathematics. This includes, but is not limited to, research in economics,
education, linguistics, medicine, psychology, physical sciences, social sciences, statistics, and
research involving human subjects or animals regardless of the funding appropriation used to
support it.




Change 1, 10/15/2018                              6                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                        DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004


     E2.1.9. Research Institution. All organizations using DoD resources (including funds,
personnel, equipment, facilities, and other resources) for research. Research institutions include,
but are not limited to, DoD intramural research laboratories, federally funded research and
development centers affiliated with the Department of Defense, colleges and universities,
national user facilities, industrial laboratories, and other research institutes, centers, or
organizations.

     E2.1.10. Research Misconduct. Fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing,
performing, or reviewing research, or in reporting research results. Research misconduct does
not include honest error or differences of opinion.

    E2.1.11. Research Record. The record of data or results that embodies the facts resulting
from scientific inquiry. It includes, but is not limited to, research proposals, laboratory records,
progress reports, abstracts, theses, oral presentations, internal reports, and journal articles,
whether in physical or electronic form.




Change 1, 10/15/2018                              7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004

                                      E3. ENCLOSURE 3

REQUIREMENTS FOR DoD COMPONENTS' RESEARCH MISCONDUCT PROCEDURES



     E3.1.1. The DoD Components shall adopt implementing procedures that recognize the role
of the research institution in ensuring that research is conducted under the highest ethical
standards and in reviewing allegations of research misconduct. A copy of the implementing
instructions (and any subsequent modifications) shall be provided to the DDR&E.

     E3.1.2. The authority to review and act on allegations of research misconduct by DoD
employees or others working in DoD facilities (other than contractor employees or consultants)
shall be placed at the lowest possible organizational level that allows an independent, unbiased,
and equitable process. However, implementing procedures may retain for the headquarters-level
of the DoD Component (parent command) the right to exercise authorities that otherwise would
be delegated to intramural research institutions.

     E3.1.3. The DoD Components shall designate in their implementing procedures responsible
individuals and the process for reviewing and responding to research misconduct-related
information and documentation submitted by research institutions.

     E3.1.4. Implementing procedures shall minimize disruption to research in process unless
the research misconduct could result in a threat to public health or safety.

      E3.1.5. The DoD Components may use their existing procedures for intramural research
institutions as long as they comply with the minimum requirements of this Instruction. Nothing
in this Instruction is intended to supersede current civilian or military personnel management
authorities.

     E3.1.6. For extramural research institutions, the DoD Components may continue to follow
existing requirements until they are superseded by changes to references (c) and (d), as
applicable. The DoD Components may not adopt new or changed research integrity/research
misconduct policies for extramural institutions in advance of final changes to references (c) and
(d).

    E3.1.7. The DoD Components may use any available resources to respond to allegations of
misconduct, including their Office of the Inspector General, legal counsel, and expert
consultants.




Change 1, 10/15/2018                            8                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                       DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004


     E3.1.8. The DoD Components may develop alternate or additional procedures to address
allegations of research misconduct that arise under classified research as long as they comply
with the minimum requirements of this Instruction and references (c) and (d), as applicable.

     E3.1.9. At a minimum, the DoD Components' procedures implementing this Instruction for
intramural research institutions shall include the following:

           E3.1.9.1. Responsibilities for handling each phase of the response to an allegation of
research misconduct: inquiry, investigation, and adjudication. These responsibilities shall be
assigned to organizations and officials that understand the research and the research
environment, can ensure objectivity, can provide due process, and reach a timely resolution. The
responsibilities for adjudication shall be separate from those for inquiry and investigation, but
they can be assigned to an individual higher in the chain of command or to a part of the research
institution other than that which conducted the inquiry and investigation.

         E3.1.9.2. Procedures for handling allegations of research misconduct made directly to
the headquarters level of the DoD Component (instead of the research institution).

           E3.1.9.3. The circumstances, if any, under which the headquarters level of the DoD
Component may respond directly to an allegation (other than exercise of the authority provided
in paragraph E3.1.2.). These include, but are not limited to, a determination that the research
institution is unable to conduct a thorough and unbiased inquiry and investigation; a
determination that it is in the public interest for the parent command to conduct the inquiry and
investigation; or a determination that the allegation involves a small organization or an
individual that cannot reasonably be expected to respond.

          E3.1.9.4. Responsibilities for, and the form and timing of, notifying an individual that
an allegation of research misconduct involving him or her has been made and its disposition.

          E3.1.9.5. A requirement to provide the report of the inquiry to a designated official in
the DoD Component after completion of the inquiry phase, if the individual's commander
(military personnel) or supervisor or commander (civilian) determines there is sufficient
evidence to proceed to an investigation.

         E3.1.9.6. A requirement that the research institution immediately notify the
headquarters level of the DoD Component and provide an explanation of the circumstances if:

               E3.1.9.6.1. The public health or safety is at risk.

               E3.1.9.6.2. The research institution's resources or interests are threatened or at
risk.

               E3.1.9.6.3. Research activities are to be suspended because of the inquiry into or
investigation of the allegation.



Change 1, 10/15/2018                             9                                 ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                       DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004


               E3.1.9.6.4. There is a possible violation of civil or criminal law.

               E3.1.9.6.5. Action to protect the interests of those involved in the inquiry into or
investigation of the allegation is required from the parent command.

               E3.1.9.6.6. A premature public disclosure of the inquiry into or investigation of
the allegation may compromise the process; or

               E3.1.9.6.7. The research community or public should be informed.

           E3.1.9.7. The notice and accompanying explanation provided by the intramural
research institution (pursuant to subparagraph E3.1.9.6.) shall be used by the headquarters level
of the DoD Component to determine whether it or the research institution shall respond directly
to the allegation (if that right is reserved as provided under paragraph E3.1.2.).

          E3.1.9.8. In any instance where the authority to adjudicate the findings is not
delegated to the intramural research institution, a requirement that, after completing the
investigation, the research institution report the outcome of the investigation to the same
individual as under subparagraph E3.1.9.5. The report shall include a copy of the evidentiary
record, the investigative report, and any other materials that bear on the allegation. If
adjudicated by the research institution, a requirement that the research institution report the
outcome of the adjudication to this individual. The report shall include a summary of the
findings and any action taken.

          E3.1.9.9. Required documentation for each phase of the response to an allegation of
misconduct and requirements related to document retention, storage, handling, and dissemination
(see subparagraph E3.1.9.12. for requirements for confidentiality). At a minimum, the
documentation should include the allegation; the methods and procedures used to gather the
information and evaluate the allegation; the outcome of the investigation (including the findings
and supporting evidence), if any; and, for findings of research misconduct, any recommended or
imposed institutional sanctions, and any recommended corrective actions.

          E3.1.9.10. Procedures to protect the rights of those who make allegations of research
misconduct to promote a climate where the informant does not fear retribution (for example,
section 2409 of title 10, United States Code, "Contractor Employees: Protection from Reprisal
for Disclosure of Certain Information" (reference (f))). Protections for those alleging research
misconduct should include protection against retaliation or harm to their positions or reputations
for making a good faith allegation and fair and objective procedures for the examination and
resolution of allegations.

          E3.1.9.11. Procedures to protect the rights of those who are alleged to have engaged in
research misconduct in order to instill confidence that individuals shall be treated in an impartial
and professional manner. Protections for subjects of allegations of research misconduct should
include providing them a description of substantial allegations made against them; giving them



Change 1, 10/15/2018                            10                                   ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                       DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004


reasonable access to the data and other supporting evidence related to the allegation; and
affording them the opportunity to respond to the allegation, the evidence, and the findings.

           E3.1.9.12. Procedures intended to ensure confidentiality during the inquiry,
investigation, and decision-making processes. To the extent possible, consistent with a fair and
thorough investigation and as allowed by law, the procedures shall limit knowledge about the
identity of subjects and informants to those who "need to know." The procedures shall be in
compliance with the Freedom of Information Act and the Privacy Act (references (g) and (h)).

          E3.1.9.13. Time frames for completing each phase of the response to an allegation of
research misconduct.

          E3.1.9.14. Types of remedies available.

           E3.1.9.15. Available appeal rights. The authority to which an appeal may be made
must not be an office or individual directly involved in the inquiry, investigation, or adjudication
of an allegation of research misconduct. "Office" means that organizational component with
formal responsibility for one or more phases of the response to an allegation of research
misconduct. The organizational level may be defined by the DoD Component as long as there is
an adequate separation of responsibilities and there is no appearance of bias, inequity, or conflict
of interest.

           E3.1.9.16. If authority to respond to an allegation of research misconduct is delegated
to a research institution, a requirement that a copy of the research institution's implementing
procedures be provided to the headquarters level of the DoD Component.

     E3.1.10. Relationship to Other Requirements. Some of the research covered by this
Instruction also may be subject to regulations of other governmental agencies (e.g., a DoD
research institution that receives funding under a grant from another Federal Agency). Research
covered under this Instruction that also is subject to requirements of other Agencies or funding
sources must be conducted in compliance with all applicable requirements.




Change 1, 10/15/2018                             11                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004


      E3.1.11. Non-compliance. Instances of any DoD Component or intramural research
institution failing to comply with the requirements of this Instruction shall be referred for
resolution to a management level that is at least one level above where the non-compliance is
alleged to have occurred. DoD Components shall provide the DDR&E reports of all actions
taken under this paragraph. Issues related to non-compliance by extramural research institutions
with requirements related to research integrity and misconduct shall be addressed, as provided in
enclosure 4, paragraph E4.1.10., and implemented in references (c) and (d).




Change 1, 10/15/2018                           12                                ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                       DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004

                                       E4. ENCLOSURE 4

           REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRAMURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS



     E4.1.1. Extramural research institutions must foster an atmosphere conducive to research
integrity. They must develop procedures to respond to allegations of research misconduct that
ensure:

          E4.1.1.1. Appropriate separation of responsibilities for inquiry and investigation, and
adjudication. (See paragraph E4.1.3.)

          E4.1.1.2. Objectivity.

          E4.1.1.3. Due process.

          E4.1.1.4. Whistleblower protection.

          E4.1.1.5. Confidentiality; and

          E4.1.1.6. Timely resolution.

      E4.1.2. Extramural research institutions may use existing procedures applicable to all of
their federally and non-federally funded activities as long as they meet the requirements
specified in this enclosure. These procedures are not required to be submitted to the DoD
awarding activity, but must be available for inspection at the research institution.

      E4.1.3. Except as provided paragraph E4.1.4., following an allegation of research
misconduct made directly to it, whether related to an ongoing award or to a proposal submitted
to the Department of Defense for funding consideration, the research institution is responsible for
response to the allegation. This includes conducting the inquiry, investigation, and, if applicable,
adjudication of the allegation. The responsibilities for adjudication must be separate from those
for inquiry and investigation, but they can be assigned to an individual higher in the chain of
command or to a part of the research institution other than that which conducted the inquiry and
investigation.

      E4.1.4. The DoD awarding activity shall refer an allegation of research misconduct made to
the Department of Defense to the cognizant extramural research institution for response.
However, the DoD awarding activity may respond to an allegation of research misconduct made
to it or to the research institution if the awarding activity determines that:

          E4.1.4.1. The research institution is unable to conduct a thorough and unbiased
inquiry and investigation;



Change 1, 10/15/2018                            13                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                         DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004


          E4.1.4.2. It is in the public interest for the Department of Defense to conduct the
inquiry and investigation; or

         E4.1.4.3. The allegation involves a small organization or an individual that cannot
reasonably be expected to respond.

     E4.1.5. After completion of the inquiry phase, the research institution must notify the
individual specified in the award of any allegation of research misconduct for which there is
sufficient evidence to proceed to an investigation. Each applicable award shall specify the
official to whom such notices must be sent.

     E4.1.6. The research institution is required to provide immediate notification at any time if:

          E4.1.6.1. The public health or safety is at risk.

          E4.1.6.2. The research institution's resources or interests are threatened or at risk.

          E4.1.6.3. Research activities are to be suspended because of the inquiry into or
investigation of the allegation.

          E4.1.6.4. There is a possible violation of civil or criminal law.

          E4.1.6.5. Action to protect the interests of those involved in the inquiry into or
investigation of the allegation is required from the DoD Component.

          E4.1.6.6. A premature public disclosure of the inquiry into or investigation of the
allegation may compromise the process; or

          E4.1.6.7. The broader research community or public should be informed.

      E4.1.7. Following completion of the investigation, the research institution must provide a
copy of the evidentiary record, the report of the investigation, recommendations made to the
institution's adjudicating official, and the written response of the individual that is the subject of
the allegation to any recommendations. This information must be provided to (insert name or
title of the Contracting Officer (generally the Administrative Contracting Officer), Grants
Officer, Agreement Officer, or other designated official).

     E4.1.8. The extramural research institution must maintain the following documents related
to an allegation of research misconduct:

          E4.1.8.1. Written statement of the original allegation.

          E4.1.8.2. Formal notification to the subject of the allegation.

          E4.1.8.3. Written outcome of the inquiry phase and supporting documentation.


Change 1, 10/15/2018                              14                                  ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                     DoDI 3210.7, May 14, 2004


         E4.1.8.4. Written report of the investigation, including the evidentiary record and
supporting documentation; and

           E4.1.8.5. If applicable, statement of recommended corrective actions and any response
thereto, including any corrective action plan.

     E4.1.9. The documents specified in paragraph E4.1.8. are considered project-related
records that must be retained for 3 years after the final decision.

      E4.1.10. In the event the extramural institution does not comply with the requirements of
the award, the DoD awarding activity may use any available administrative or other appropriate
remedy, including the termination of award(s) or suspension and debarment of the institution.
The DoD awarding activity also may recommend suspension or debarment of the individual that
is the subject of the allegation after a finding of research misconduct.




Change 1, 10/15/2018                           15                               ENCLOSURE 4
