                             Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 5105.65
                                                                              October 26, 2012
                                                       Incorporating Change 1 on March 2, 2023

                                                                                          DA&M

SUBJECT:     Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

     a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5105.65 (Reference (a)) to update the mission,
organization and management, responsibilities and functions, relationships, and authorities of the
DSCA, in accordance with sections 191 and 192 of title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.)
(Reference (b)), and the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by section 113 of Reference
(b).

   b. Authorizes and directs the conversion of DoD 5105.38-M and DoD 5105.65-M
(References (c) and (d)) from DoD issuances to a DSCA Manual within 180 days, after which
time those DoD issuances shall be removed (cancelled) from the DoD Directives system.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. MISSION. The DSCA, under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy (USD(P)), directs, administers, and provides DoD-wide guidance to the DoD
Components and DoD representatives to U.S. missions abroad for the execution of DoD security
assistance and security cooperation programs over which DSCA has responsibility, in
accordance with Chapter 32 and Chapter 39 of title 22, U.S.C. (Reference (e)), DoDD 5132.03
(Reference (f)), other laws, and this Directive.




                                                1
                                                               DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


4. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

  a. The DSCA is a Defense Agency, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P), or as delegated by the USD(P), pursuant to section 192 of Reference (b).

    b. The DSCA shall consist of a Director and such subordinate organizational elements as
established by the Director within resources assigned by the Secretary of Defense.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS. The Director, DSCA, shall:

   a. Organize, direct, and manage the DSCA and all assigned resources.

   b. Represent the interests of the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P) in security
cooperation matters, in accordance with this Directive, Reference (f), and direction from the
USD(P).

    c. Direct, administer, and provide DoD-wide guidance to the DoD Components and DoD
representatives to U.S. missions for the execution of DoD security cooperation programs for
those programs over which DSCA has responsibility, in accordance with sections 2151, et seq.,
and 2751, et seq., of Reference (e), Reference (f)), other laws, and this Directive.

   d. Delegate the administration of security cooperation programs, in whole or in part, to the
Military Departments, Combatant Commands, and Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities
implementing assigned responsibilities, as appropriate, under the overall guidance of the DSCA.

    e. Conduct security cooperation and sales negotiations with foreign countries in accordance
with USD(P) guidance, and negotiate and conclude security cooperation-related international
agreements, in accordance with DoDD 5530.3 (Reference (g)), and in coordination with the
General Counsel of the Department of Defense (GC, DoD).

    f. Co-chair the Security Cooperation Steering Group (SCSG), with the USD(P)-designated
representative, in accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5105.18 (Reference (h)). The SCSG
shall:

        (1) Consist of representatives from the Combatant Commands; Military Departments;
Joint Staff; the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
Logistics (OUSD(AT&L)); the Office of the USD(P); the Under Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence (USD(I)); the Office of the GC, DoD; and the Defense Technology Security
Agency.

        (2) Provide general oversight of DoD worldwide security cooperation efforts focusing on
the timely transfer of defense articles and services in support of DoD strategic and regional
objectives.




Change 1, 03/02/2023                            2
                                                                DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


       (3) Oversee the implementation of high-priority and urgent foreign military sales (FMS)
cases and related activities to ensure they are executed in a timely and effective manner.

         (4) Oversee the development, maintenance, and application of DoD equipping priority
guidelines and make recommendations regarding requests to deviate from DoD equipping
priorities or when there are competing demands between partner nations, or between partner
nations and U.S. forces, for defense articles and services, in a manner consistent with the
priorities and allocations authorities assigned under DoDD 4400.01E (Reference (i)).

   g. Establish, in accordance with Reference (h), a security cooperation Strategic Planning
Support Group (SPSG) to collaborate and coordinate with the Commanders of the Combatant
Commands, Secretaries of the Military Departments, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
USD(AT&L), and USD(P) (including the Technology Security and Foreign Disclosure Office
(TSFDO)). The SPSG shall:

        (1) In coordination with the stakeholders identified in paragraph 5.g., identify partner
capability requirements that may require DoD-level technology security and foreign disclosure
reviews and documentation, including the development of mitigation plans that anticipate
potential releasability problems, as required.

       (2) Develop proposed policies for potential arms transfers and submit them, through the
TSFDO to the Arms Transfer and Technology Release Senior Steering Group, for review and
approval through the Technology Security and Foreign Disclosure processes.

   h. In coordination with the Commanders of the Combatant Commands, the Secretaries of the
Military Departments, the USD(P), and, when appropriate, the USD(I), the Heads of other DoD
Components, and other Federal agency representatives, establish and deploy expeditionary
requirements generation teams to partner countries, as necessary, to assist Combatant Commands
and Security Cooperation Organizations (SCOs) with translating capability needs into specific
requirements for military equipment, training, and services.

    i. Develop, coordinate, and publish a single DSCA manual that incorporates the provisions
of, and replaces, References (c) and (d).

  j. Inform the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Commanders of the Combatant
Commands of security cooperation matters for which DSCA has responsibility.

    k. Maintain liaison with Congress, in coordination with the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Legislative Affairs (ASD(LA)) and the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)
(USD(C))/Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Department of Defense, as appropriate, on security
cooperation legislation and related matters for which DSCA has responsibility; and provide
support to the USD(P) for the presentation of security cooperation related briefings and
testimony before the Congress.

    l. Resource and lead the administration of security cooperation programs for which DSCA
has responsibility throughout the DoD.



Change 1, 03/02/2023                            3
                                                                DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012



   m. Exercise financial management and fiduciary responsibility for the FMS Trust Fund and
reporting functions for security cooperation programs for which DSCA has responsibility. In
addition, exercise management and dissemination responsibility over FMS administrative funds.

    n. Develop, operate, and maintain, in accordance with policies, standards, and procedures
established by the DoD Chief Information Officer, Defense Information Systems Agency, and
U.S. Cyber Command, appropriate information technology systems and databases in support of
security cooperation programs and the security cooperation workforce.

   o. Provide oversight and exercise overall management responsibility for the Defense
Security Assistance Development Center for the development, operation, maintenance, and
enhancement of information systems to support security cooperation programs and the security
cooperation workforce.

    p. Provide oversight and exercise overall management responsibility for the Defense
Institute for International Legal Studies for the professional legal education and training of
foreign military and civilian leaders, in accordance with Memorandum of Agreement between
the USD(P) and the GC, DoD (Reference (j)).

    q. Act as the DoD Executive Agent for DoD Regional Centers for Security Studies, in
accordance with Reference (f), Directive-Type Memorandum 05-002 (Reference (k)), and
direction from the Secretary of Defense and the USD(P).

    r. Ensure the DoD security cooperation workforce possesses the skills required to develop
partner country capabilities in support of U.S. theater and global objectives.

        (1) Provide oversight and exercise overall management responsibility for the Defense
Institute of Security Assistance Management for the consolidated professional education of the
security cooperation workforce.

       (2) Identify requirements, criteria, and procedures for the selection and training of key
personnel engaged in DoD security cooperation activities.

      (3) Conduct periodic assessments of the security cooperation workforce to identify
manning and training gaps.

    s. Provide functional oversight of DoD elements in foreign countries responsible for
managing security assistance and security cooperation programs for which DSCA has
responsibility.

   t. Jointly, with the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), and in accordance with
DoDD 5105.75 (Reference (l)), manage the Senior Defense Official (SDO)/Defense Attaché
(DATT) nomination, selection, and training process, and provide guidance and oversight of
SDOs/DATTs in discharging responsibility for managing security cooperation programs.




Change 1, 03/02/2023                            4
                                                                DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


    u. Jointly, with the Director, DIA, approve changes to the grade or Military Department
affiliation of the SDO or DATT.

    v. Fund and provide related oversight functions for SCO program management and approve,
in coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, SCO joint manpower programs
involving the establishment of new SCOs or changes in manpower authorizations or
organizational structure.

     w. Provide recommendations to the USD(P) for policy on DoD participation in international
air shows and trade exhibitions, and provide oversight on such participation.

   x. Provide oversight and exercise overall program management responsibility for DoD
humanitarian assistance and demining activities funded by the Overseas Humanitarian Disaster
and Civic Aid, also known as “OHDACA” appropriation, in coordination with the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low Intensity Conflict (ASD(SO/LIC)).

    y. Provide oversight of program execution and exercise overall resourcing management
responsibility for the DoD and international portions of the Warsaw Initiative Program, in
coordination with the ASD(SO/LIC).

    z. Provide oversight of program execution and exercise overall resourcing management
responsibility for the Defense Institutions Reform Initiative program, in coordination with the
ASD(SO/LIC).

   aa. Provide oversight and, in coordination with the Department of State, exercise overall
program management responsibility for the Special Defense Acquisition Fund.

    ab. Design and manage DSCA programs and activities to improve standards of performance,
economy, and efficiency and demonstrate DSCA’s attention to the requirements of its
organizational customers, both internal and external to the DoD, consistent with the requirements
of the Secretary of Defense Biennial Review of Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities.

    ac. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Secretary of Defense, the USD(P),
or delegated authority.


6. RELATIONSHIPS

   a. In the performance of assigned responsibilities and functions, the Director, DSCA, shall:

       (1) Report to the USD(P), or an official designated by the USD(P), pursuant to sections
192 and 131 of Reference (b).

       (2) Maintain appropriate liaison with other DoD Components for the exchange of
information on programs in the field of assigned responsibilities.




Change 1, 03/02/2023                            5
                                                                DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


        (3) Conduct activities involving financial management, fiscal matters, accounting,
budgeting, statistical reporting, and the international balance of payments, in accordance with
policies and procedures established by the USD(C)/CFO.

      (4) Use existing systems, facilities, and services of the DoD and other Federal agencies,
when possible, to avoid duplication and to achieve maximum effectiveness, efficiency, and
economy.

    b. The Military Departments and other DoD Components shall provide support, within their
respective fields of responsibility, to the Director, DSCA, to assist in carrying out assigned
responsibilities and functions of DSCA.

   c. The basic responsibilities and functions of other DoD Components relating to security
cooperation remain as assigned in Reference (f).

    d. The Director, DSCA, shall ensure that all DSCA security cooperation-related
communications, and direction and guidance issued to the Combatant Commands, the Military
Departments, and the SCOs that have military operational implications, are coordinated with the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Correspondingly, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall ensure that Joint Chiefs of Staff instructions and communications to the Combatant
Commands or the Secretaries of the Military Departments that pertain to security cooperation
affairs are coordinated with the Director, DSCA.


7. AUTHORITIES. The Director, DSCA, is specifically delegated authority to:

    a. Communicate directly with the other Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to
carry out assigned responsibilities and functions, including the transmission of requests for
advice and assistance.

        (1) Communications to the Military Departments shall be transmitted through the
Secretaries of the Military Departments or their designees, or as otherwise provided in law or
directed by the Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances.

        (2) Formal communications to the Commanders of the Combatant Commands normally
shall be transmitted through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, except those
communications dealing solely with security cooperation functions.

    b. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the Legislative Branch,
members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments, as appropriate, in carrying
out assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with representatives of the
Legislative Branch shall be coordinated with the ASD(LA) and the USD(C)/CFO, as appropriate,
and be consistent with the DoD Legislative Program.

   c. Obtain reports and information, in accordance with DoDI 8910.1 (Reference (m)), as
necessary, to carry out assigned responsibilities and functions.



Change 1, 03/02/2023                            6
                                                                DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


    d. Perform all functions of making findings, determinations, certifications, and waivers,
consistent with authority delegated to the USD(P) in DoDD 5111.1 (Reference (n)), and pursuant
to:

       (1) The delegation to the Secretary of Defense made by Executive Order 11958
(Reference (o)), as amended.

       (2) The delegation to the Secretary of Defense made by Executive Order 12163
(Reference (p)), as amended.

        (3) Those authorities provided to the Secretary of Defense under Chapter 32 of
Reference (e) (also known as the “Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended”) and Chapter 39
of Reference (e) (also known as the “Arms Export Control Act of 1976, as amended”) not
referred to in subparagraphs 7.d.(1) and 7.d.(2).

       (4) Such other delegations as may be made by the Secretary of Defense or the USD(P),
including delegations of authority provided in security cooperation-related provisions of
authorization and appropriation acts.

    e. Grant waivers or reductions of nonrecurring cost (NC) recoupment charges and approve
pro rata NC recoupment charges for major defense equipment. These authorities shall be
exercised in coordination with the USD(AT&L), the USD(C)/CFO, the DSCA General Counsel,
and, as appropriate, the offices within the Office of the USD(P). This further delegates authority
delegated to the USD(P) in DoDD 2140.2 (Reference (q)).

   f. Exercise the administrative delegations of authority in Enclosure 2.


8. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the DoD
Issuances Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


9. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance removes the expiration language
in accordance with DoD Instruction 5025.01 (Reference (r)).




Change 1, 03/02/2023                            7
                                                         DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


10. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective October 26, 2012.




                                            Ashton B. Carter
                                            Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Delegations of Authority
Glossary




Change 1, 03/02/2023                       8
                                                                             DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


                                                  ENCLOSURE 1

                                                   REFERENCES


(a)     DoD Directive 5105.65, “Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA),”
        October 31, 2000 (hereby cancelled)
(b)     Title 10, United States Code
(c)     DoD 5105.38-M, “Security Assistance Management Manual (SAMM),” October 3, 2003
(d)     DoD 5105.65-M, “Foreign Military Sales (FMS) Case Reconciliation and Closure Manual
        (RCM),” August 11, 2004
(e)     Title 22, United States Code
(f)     DoD Directive 5132.03, “DoD Policy and Responsibilities Relating to Security
        Cooperation,” October 24, 2008
(g)     DoD Directive 5530.3, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987
(h)     DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
        Management Program,” July 10, 2009
(i)     DoD Directive 4400.01E, “Defense Production Act Programs,” October 12, 2001
(j)     Memorandum of Agreement between the USD(P) and the General Counsel of the DoD,
        April 17, 2007 1
(k)     Directive-Type Memorandum 05-002, “Executive Agent for DoD Regional Centers for
        Security Studies,” September 29, 2005
(l)     DoD Directive 5105.75, “Department of Defense Operations at U.S. Embassies,”
        December 21, 2007
(m)     DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,” March 6, 2007
(n)     DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),”
        December 8, 1999
(o)     Executive Order 11958, “Administration of Arms Export Controls,” January 18, 1977
(p)     Executive Order 12163, “Administration of Foreign Assistance and Related Functions,”
        September 29, 1979
(q)     DoD Directive 2140.2, “Recoupment of Nonrecurring Costs (NCs) on Sales of U.S. Items,”
        January 13, 1993
(r)     DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended




1
    Contact the Office of the Director for Strategy, DSCA, (703) 604-6642, for copies of this document.


Change 1, 03/02/2023                                       9                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                               DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY


Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to the authority,
direction, and control of the USD(P), and in accordance with DoD policies and issuances, the
Director, DSCA, or in the absence of the Director, the person acting for the Director, is hereby
delegated authority as required in the administration and operations of the DSCA to:

    a. Exercise the powers vested in the Secretary of Defense by sections 301, 302(b), 3101, and
5107 of title 5, U.S.C. on the employment, direction, and general administration of DSCA
civilian personnel.

    b. Fix rates of pay of wage-rate employees exempted from the Classification Act of 1949 by
section 5102 of title 5, U.S.C. on the basis of rates established under the Federal Wage System.
In fixing such rates, the Director, DSCA, shall follow the wage schedule established by the DoD
Wage Fixing Authority.

    c. Administer oaths of office to those entering the Executive Branch of the Federal
Government or any other oath required by law in connection with employment therein, in
accordance with section 2903 of title 5, U.S.C., and designate in writing, as may be necessary,
officers and employees of the DSCA to perform this function.

    d. Establish a DSCA Incentive Awards Board, and pay cash awards to, and incur necessary
expenses for the honorary recognition of, civilian employees of the Government whose
suggestions, inventions, superior accomplishments, or other personal efforts, including special
acts or services, benefit or affect the DSCA, in accordance with section 4503 of title 5, U.S.C.;
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations; and DoD 1400.25-M, “Civilian Personnel
Manual,” December, 1996, Subchapter 451, “Awards”.

   e. Maintain an official seal and attest to the authenticity of official records under that seal.

    f. Use advisory committees and employ temporary or intermittent experts or consultants, as
approved by the Secretary of Defense or the Director of Administration and Management, for the
performance of DSCA functions, consistent with sections 173 and 174 of title 10, U.S.C.; section
3109(b) of title 5, U.S.C.; the Federal Advisory Committee Act (Appendix 2 of title 5, U.S.C.);
and DoDI 5105.04, “Department of Defense Federal Advisory Committee Management
Program,” August 6, 2007.

    g. In accordance with Executive Order 10450, “Security Requirements for Government
Employment,” April 27, 1953; Executive Order 12968, “Access to Classified Information,”
August 4, 1995; and DoDD 5200.2, “DoD Personnel Security Program (DoDSP),” April 9, 1999,
as appropriate:

       (1) Designate any position in the DSCA as a “sensitive” position.



Change 1, 03/02/2023                             10                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


        (2) Authorize, in exceptional circumstances where official functions must be performed
prior to the completion of an investigation and adjudication process, temporary access to a
sensitive position in the DSCA for a limited period to individuals for whom an appropriate
investigation is underway.

        (3) Initiate personnel security investigations and, if necessary, in the interest of national
security, suspend a security clearance for personnel assigned to, detailed to, or employed by the
DSCA. Any actions under this paragraph shall be taken in accordance with procedures
prescribed in DoD 5200.2-R, “Personnel Security Program,” January, 1987.

   h. Authorize and approve:

        (1) Temporary duty travel for military personnel assigned or detailed to the DSCA in
accordance with Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1, “Uniformed Service Members,”
current edition.

       (2) Travel for DSCA civilian personnel, in accordance with Joint Travel Regulations
(JTR), Volume 2, “DoD Civilian Personnel,” current edition.

        (3) Invitational travel to non-DoD personnel whose consultative, advisory, or other
highly specialized technical services are required in a capacity that is directly related to, or in
connection with, DSCA activities, in accordance with JTR, Volume 2, “DoD Civilian
Personnel.”

       (4) Overtime work for DSCA civilian personnel in accordance with subchapter V of
chapter 55 of title 5, U.S.C. and applicable OPM regulations.

     i. Approve the expenditure of funds available for travel by military personnel assigned or
detailed to the DSCA for expenses incident to attendance at meetings of technical, scientific,
professional, or other similar organizations in such instances when the approval of the Secretary
of Defense, or designee, is required by section 412 of title 37, U.S.C. and sections 4110 and 4111
of title 5, U.S.C.

   j. Develop, establish, and maintain an active and continuing Records Management Program,
pursuant to section 3102 of title 44, U.S.C. and DoDD 5015.2, “DoD Records Management
Program,” March 6, 2000.

   k. Use the Government-Wide Purchase Card for making appropriate purchases of material
and services, other than personal services, for the DSCA when it is determined more
advantageous and consistent with the best interests of the Government.

    l. Authorize the publication of advertisements, notices, or proposals in newspapers,
magazines, or other public periodicals, as required for the effective administration and operation
of the DSCA, consistent with section 3702 of title 44, U.S.C.




Change 1, 03/02/2023                              11                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


    m. Establish and maintain, for the functions assigned, an appropriate publications system for
the promulgation of agency regulations, instructions, and reference documents, and changes
thereto, similar to the policies and procedures prescribed in DoDI 5025.01, “DoD Directives
Program,” October 28, 2007.

    n. Enter into interdepartmental and intragovernmental support agreements, as the receiver or
the supplier, with the other DoD Components, non-DoD Federal Government departments and
agencies, and State and local governments, as required for effective performance of DSCA
responsibilities and functions, in accordance with section 1535 of title 31, U.S.C. and DoDI
4000.19, “Interservice and Intragovernmental Support,” August 9, 1995.

   o. Enter into and administer contracts, directly or through a Military Department, a DoD
contract administration services component, or other Federal agency, as appropriate, for supplies,
equipment, and services required to accomplish the mission of the DSCA. To the extent that any
law or Executive order specifically limits the exercise of such authority to persons at the
Secretarial level of a Military Department, such authority shall be exercised by the appropriate
Under Secretary or Assistant Secretary of Defense.

    p. Establish and maintain appropriate property accounts for the DSCA and appoint Boards of
Survey, approve reports of survey, relieve personal liability, and drop accountability for DSCA
property contained in the authorized property accounts that has been lost, damaged, stolen,
destroyed, or otherwise rendered unserviceable, in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations.

    q. Issue the necessary security regulations for the protection of property and places under the
jurisdiction of the Director, DSCA, pursuant to DoDI 5200.08, “Security of DoD Installations
and Resources and the DoD Physical Security Review Board (PSRB),” December 10, 2005.

    r. Lease property under the control of the DSCA, under terms that will promote the national
defense or that will be in the public interest, pursuant to section 2667 of title 10, U.S.C.

    s. Exercise the authority delegated to the Secretary of Defense by the Administrator of the
General Services Administration under Federal Management Regulation 102-75.1055 for the
disposal of surplus personal property.

   t. Redelegate these authorities, as appropriate, and in writing, except as otherwise
specifically indicated in this Directive or as otherwise provided by law or regulation.




Change 1, 03/02/2023                            12                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                           DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


                                        GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(LA)        Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs
ASD(SO/LIC)    Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low Intensity
               Conflict


DATTs          Defense attachés
DIA            Defense Intelligence Agency
DoDD           DoD Directive
DoDI           DoD Instruction
DSCA           Defense Security Cooperation Agency


FMS            foreign military sales


GC, DoD        General Counsel of the Department of Defense


JTR            Joint Travel Regulations


NC             nonrecurring cost


OHDACA     Overseas Humanitarian Disaster and Civic Aid
OPM        Office of Personnel Management
OUSD(AT&L) Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology,
           and Logistics


SCO            Security Cooperation Organization
SCSG           Security Cooperation Steering Group
SDO/DATT       Senior Defense Official/Defense Attaché
SPSG           Strategic Planning Support Group


TSFDO          Technology Security and Foreign Disclosure Office


U.S.C.         United States Code
USD(AT&L)      Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics


Change 1, 03/02/2023                        13                                  GLOSSARY
                                                           DoDD 5105.65, October 26, 2012


USD(C)/CFO     Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
               Department of Defense
USD(I)         Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)         Under Secretary of Defense for Policy




Change 1, 03/02/2023                       14                                  GLOSSARY
