                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 5240.05
                                                                                   April 3, 2014
                                               Incorporating Change 2, Effective August 27, 2020

                                                                                        USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:      Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM)

References: See Enclosure 1

1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01 (Reference
(a)), this instruction:

    a. Reissues DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5240.05 (Reference (b)) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities for TSCM.

    b. Implements procedures for DoD TSCM in accordance with DoDD 5240.02 (Reference
(c)).

   c. Refines organizational relationships in accordance with DoDI O-5240.10 (Reference (d)).

   d. Defines the role of TSCM as one of the counterintelligence (CI) functional services in
accordance with Reference (d).


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands
(CCMDs), the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense
Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred
to collectively in this instruction as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. TSCM will be conducted to detect, neutralize, and exploit technical surveillance and
associated devices, technologies, and hazards that facilitate the unauthorized or inadvertent
access to or removal of DoD information in accordance with Reference (c).

   b. Only DoD personnel who have successfully completed approved TSCM training will
conduct TSCM.
                                                                    DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


    c. Only organizations authorized in Enclosure 4 and subsequently approved to conduct
TSCM will acquire, possess, or employ equipment and personnel for the purpose of detecting
technical surveillance and associated devices, technologies, and hazards.

  d. As designated in Enclosure 5, organizations will provide TSCM support to the DoD
Components that lack an organic TSCM capability.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and
Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (e)).


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective April 3, 2014.




                                                Michael G. Vickers
                                                Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
   4. Organizations Authorized to Conduct TSCM
   5. TSCM Support to DoD Components Without A TSCM Capability
   6. DoD TSCM IMG Charter
Glossary




Change 2, 08/27/2020                            2
                                                                DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                      REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
     (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(b) DoD Instruction 5240.05, “Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) Program,”
     February 22, 2006 (hereby cancelled)
(c) DoD Directives 5240.02, “Counterintelligence (CI),” March 17, 2015, as amended
(d) DoD Instruction 5240.10, “Counterintelligence (CI) in the DoD Components,”
     April 27, 2020
(e) Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,” December
     20, 2019
(f) DoD Instruction 3305.11, “DoD Counterintelligence (CI) Training and Certification,”
     August 13, 2015, as amended
(g) DoD Instruction 3305.12, “Intelligence and Counterintelligence (I&CI) Training of Non-
     U.S. Persons,” October 14, 2016, as amended
(h) DoD Directive 8140.01, “Cyberspace Workforce Management,” August 11, 2015, as
     amended
(i) DoD Manual S-5240.05, "The Conduct of Technical Surveillance Countermeasures
    (TSCM)," April 23, 2015, as amended
(j) DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components that
     Affect United States Persons,” December 7, 1982, as amended
(k) DoD Instruction C-5240.08, “Counterintelligence (CI) Security Classification Guide (U),”
     November 28, 2011
(l) DoD Manual 5200.01, Volume 3, “DoD Information Security Program: Protection of
     Classified Information,” February 24, 2012, as amended
(m) Director of Central Intelligence Directive 5/1P, “Espionage and Counterintelligence
     Activities Abroad,” December 19, 1984




                                             3
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                    DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY
(USD(I&S)). The USD(I&S):

   a. Serves as the TSCM advisor to the Secretary of Defense .

   b. Authorizes DoD organizations to conduct TSCM.

   c. Delegates authority to the Secretaries of the Military Departments in accordance with
Enclosure 3 to authorize the creation of TSCM programs within their respective Departments.


2. DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR INTELLIGENCE (INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY)
(DDI(I&S)). Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), the DDI(I&S):

   a. Develops and recommends TSCM policy to the USD(I&S).

   b. Provides TSCM policy oversight.

   c. Provides direction for exploiting a discovered technical surveillance.


3. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (DIA). Under the authority, direction,
and control of the USD(I&S) and in addition to the responsibilities in sections 5 and 6 of this
enclosure, the Director, DIA, oversees TSCM and:

   a. Appoints the TSCM functional manager.

    b. Notifies the USD(I&S), DDI(I&S), and other senior DoD officials regarding TSCM
technical surveillances, trends, and issues.

   c. Represents the DoD TSCM community at national TSCM forums, except as noted below.

  d. In coordination with the TSCM organizations in Enclosure 4, develops and establishes
TSCM resource and performance measurement standards.

   e. Conducts reviews of the TSCM organizations at least biennially.

   f. Chairs the TSCM Integrated Management Group (IMG).

    g. Ensures DoD TSCM reporting is documented in the USD(I&S)-approved CI information
system.

                                                4
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                     ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                       DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014



    h. Recommends TSCM changes in DoD policy, procedures, standards, doctrine, and
planning documents.

   i. Coordinates with the Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
(DIRNSA/CHCSS) concerning funding for TSCM research, development, test, and evaluation
(RDT&E), exercises, and training.

    j. Provides and coordinates CI analytical support regarding foreign intelligence entity (FIE)
technical surveillance threats.

   k. Recommends the assignment of lead responsibilities for on-site coordination in a joint
operating environment.

    l. In coordination with the TSCM IMG and the Interagency Training Center (ITC),
establishes TSCM training standards and practices.

   m. Maintains, by fiscal year, TSCM metrics on:

       (1) The number of TSCM reports generated.

        (2) The number and description of technical surveillances and hazardous conditions
identified during TSCM.

   n. Publishes procedural guides or standards for use by the DoD TSCM community.

   o. Notifies the appropriate DoD and national-level authorities of technical surveillances and
hazardous conditions.

   p. Provides an annual review to the DDI(I&S) of DoD TSCM capabilities and activities.


4. DIRNSA/CHCSS. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S) and in
addition to the responsibilities in sections 5 and 6 of this enclosure, the DIRNSA/CHCSS:

   a. Coordinates, conducts, and manages DoD TSCM RDT&E, training, and exercise support.

   b. Provides the customer, supporting TSCM organization program manager, and the
Director, DIA, with preliminary analysis of TSCM materials and evidence within 10 business
days of receipt and a final report within 60 business days of receipt, as resources and priorities
permit or upon mutual agreement with the customer.

   c. Represents DoD at national-level TSCM forums with regard to TSCM RDT&E, training,
and exercise activities.




                                                 5
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


   d. Represents DoD, in coordination with the Director, DIA, in TSCM RDT&E, training, and
exercise management with foreign partners.

    e. Coordinates with the Director, DIA, regarding the release of TSCM training materials to
foreign governments.

   f. Operates and maintains the ITC and the Interagency Test and Evaluation Laboratory
(ITEL).

   g. Notifies the Director, DIA, of ITC and ITEL activities supporting TSCM.

   h. Conducts reviews and submits budget requirements for TSCM RDT&E and training
matters funded in the Information Systems Security Program.

   i. Executes TSCM training standards and recommends the TSCM practitioners certification
process in coordination with the TSCM IMG and the DoD CI and Human Intelligence
(HUMINT) Training Council in accordance with DoDI 3305.11 (Reference (f)) and DoDI
3305.12 (Reference (g)).

   j. Operates a technical security analysis capability.

    k. Distributes technical surveillance device and hazard reports to the DoD Components
through the USD(I&S)-approved CI information system, as appropriate.

   l. Provides training products and briefings to increase awareness of the technical threat.

    m. Coordinates with the Director, DIA, concerning funding for TSCM RDT&E and other
enterprise wide TSCM capability.

   n. Publishes training guides or standards for use by the DoD TSCM community.

   o. Provides training through the ITC for TSCM practitioners to meet the minimum training
requirements for access to DoD networks in accordance with DoDD 8140.01 (Reference (i)).


5. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

    a. Request TSCM support to ensure sensitive and classified working environments are free
of technical surveillances and hazards.

   b. Respond to TSCM reports within 90 business days to address corrective actions,
acceptance of risk, or refutation of findings.

   c. Coordinate with the supporting TSCM organization in conducting a damage assessment
when technical surveillance is discovered and submit the assessment to the Director, DIA.



                                                6
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                    DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


  d. Employ operations security with any proposed, planned, in-progress, or completed
TSCM.

    e. Permit the access of TSCM practitioners, technicians, and equipment into facilities where
technical surveillance is discover or TSCM is requested or required.

    f. In coordination with the supporting TSCM organization, establish procedures to notify the
appropriate authorities if a suspected technical surveillance is discovered in accordance with
section 3 of Enclosure 3.

    g. Permit access by TSCM practitioners and technicians, and equipment onto information
systems and networks.

       (1) Confirm that the TSCM practitioners meet the minimum training requirements for
unsupervised access to DoD networks in accordance with Reference (h).

       (2) Permit the properly trained TSCM practitioner full administrator privileges to the
systems involved in the TSCM.

   h. Request TSCM program authorization from the Secretary of the Military Department to
which the organization belongs or the USD(I&S), as appropriate.

   i. Ensure any TSCM-unique equipment remains in the custody of the TSCM organization.


6. DoD COMPONENT HEADS WITH TSCM ORGANIZATIONS. In addition to the
responsibilities in section 5 of this enclosure, the DoD Component heads with TSCM
organizations:

   a. Appoint a TSCM program manager.

   b. Establish written TSCM procedures and integrate TSCM with CI missions and functions.

    c. When requested, provide the Director, DIA, with TSCM budgetary submissions and
relevant information in support of TSCM reviews.

   d. Support designated DoD Components in accordance with Enclosure 5.

   e. Ensure TSCM practitioners are trained and certified in accordance with Enclosure 3.

    f. May develop the use of TSCM technicians in accordance with Enclosure 3 to assist TSCM
practitioners in the execution of the Component TSCM requirements.

    g. Immediately notify the DoD TSCM functional manager of the discovery of a technical
surveillance.



                                                7
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                     ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                        DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


    h. Ensure TSCM reporting is documented in the USD(I&S)-approved CI information
system.

   i. Notify the supporting Military Department CI organization (MDCO) of all discoveries of
suspected surveillances and hazardous conditions.

    j. Coordinate with the DIRNSA/CHCSS for technical and analytic support to reports and
briefings on devices found by TSCM practitioners, as appropriate.

   k. Provide a representative to the TSCM IMG.

   l. Annually, provide the TSCM IMG and ITC with TSCM training requirements.

   m. Ensure TSCM practitioners meet the minimum training requirements for access to DoD
networks in accordance with Reference (h).

   n. Notify the USD(I&S) and Director, DIA, when opening or closing a TSCM program.


7. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In accordance with Enclosure 3
and in addition to the responsibilities in section 5 and 6 of this enclosure, the Secretaries of the
Military Departments:

   a. May authorize TSCM programs within their respective Departments and possess
equipment for TSCM.

   b. Will notify the USD(I&S) and Director, DIA, when new TSCM programs are authorized
and when existing programs are closed within their respective Departments.




                                                  8
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                     DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                         PROCEDURES


1. GENERAL

   a. TSCM activities are conducted in accordance with DoD Manual S-5240.05 (Reference (i))
and DoD 5240.1-R (Reference (j)).

   b. The two levels of DoD trained TSCM personnel who may either conduct or assist in the
conduct of TSCM are TSCM practitioners and TSCM technicians.

   c. TSCM practitioners will:

       (1) Complete the ITC Fundamentals course.

         (2) Complete at least 40 hours of discipline-specific development or refresher training
every fiscal year. The development or refresher training may consist of classroom, video, on-
line, or commercially-available training or exercises.

       (3) Have a Top Secret security clearance with sensitive compartmented information
(SCI) access.

        (4) Be certified by their DoD Component head to conduct TSCM with at least the
training requirements of paragraph 1c.

        (5) In a reasonable amount of time, respond to the discovery of a suspected technical
surveillance device.

   d. TSCM technicians will:

       (1) Be associated with an authorized TSCM program.

       (2) Conduct TSCM under the oversight of a TSCM practitioner.

       (3) At a minimum, have at least a Secret security clearance. A higher level clearance is
required for certain missions.


2. REQUESTS AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

   a. Customers request TSCM support:

       (1) In accordance with the supporting TSCM organizational procedures.



                                                 9
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                       DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


     (2) Via secure communications from outside the area or facilities that will receive the
TSCM support. Verbal requests must be followed with written documentation within 24 hours.

   b. TSCM program managers:

       (1) Prioritize support requests considering TSCM requirements and threat assessments.

       (2) Recommend the use of a facility technical threat analysis to determine if a TSCM is
warranted. Facilities may not automatically receive a recurrent TSCM.

        (3) Upon receipt of a TSCM request, notify the customer of approval or of disapproval
with written justification. A timeline of when TSCM will be provided may be given to the
customer at the DoD Component TSCM program manager’s discretion, based on the TSCM
organization’s policies, individual mission circumstances, and operational security requirements.
If additional information would justify an approval, customers may request reevaluation.

       (4) Approve requests for assessment of facilities or categories of facilities that are
probable and feasible targets for technical surveillance or exploitation based on the facility
technical threat analysis.

        (5) No later than 30 business days after completion of a TSCM, provide a final report to
the customer, the SCI facility, or other facility accreditation authority.

       (6) Record TSCM reporting and feedback into the USD(I&S)-approved CI information
system.

        (7) Develop the capability, resources permitting, of CI-focused TSCM targeting using a
risk-based approach with the goal of identifying and exploiting technical collection efforts
targeting DoD interests.


3. DISCOVERY OF SUSPECTED TECHNICAL SURVEILLANCE

   a. Upon discovery of a suspected technical surveillance, immediately:

       (1) Secure the area to prevent unauthorized access or removal of any device.

       (2) Maintain a normal working environment to prevent alerting the FIE of the discovery
of suspected technical surveillance.

       (3) Classify information regarding the discovery of a suspected technical surveillance in
accordance with DoDI C-5240.08 (Reference (k)).

       (4) Conduct communications regarding suspected technical surveillance outside the area
containing the surveillance device and via secure means.



                                                 10
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                    DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


       (5) Notify the responsible security manager.

      (6) Notify the supporting TSCM organization in accordance with Enclosure 4 via secure
communications. If direct reporting is not feasible, report the discovery through the security
manager.

   b. The security manager or responsible official will:

       (1) Notify the supporting MDCO or supporting DoD Component TSCM organization.

        (2) Prevent removal or tampering with a suspected technical surveillance device unless a
potential exists for physical danger to personnel or property.

       (3) Ensure TSCM practitioners and technicians can access the area.

       (4) Limit knowledge of the discovery to only those with an immediate need to know.

        (5) Notify the appropriate Military Department, agency, or command security officer of
the discovery.

        (6) Document all personnel with knowledge of the discovery. Include full name, grade,
position, and date each individual was briefed. Provide this list to the responding TSCM team.

   c. Supporting TSCM team personnel will:

       (1) Notify the DIRNSA/CHCSS or designee of any known or suspected compromise
involving cryptographic systems.

       (2) Notify the DoD TSCM functional manager who will notify the DDI(I&S) and the
National TSCM Program Office.

    d. The supporting MDCO will coordinate with the TSCM organization that discovered the
technical surveillance, the organizational commander of the location of the discovery, and the
DDI(I&S) to determine the appropriateness of exploitation of the surveillance.


4. IN-PLACE MONITORING SYSTEMS. Commanders or directors of sensitive projects or
facilities who desire to augment their TSCM support may install in-place monitoring equipment
under the following conditions. The commanders or directors will:

    a. Coordinate with the supporting TSCM program manager and legal advisor prior to
obtaining any equipment.

   b. Coordinate with the supporting TSCM program manager and the Director, DIA, to
develop an operational plan.



                                               11
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                    ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                      DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


    c. Fund developmental and coordination costs, equipment purchases, installation, life-cycle
costs, training, and operation for in-place monitoring, including an alert response capability and
plans.

   d. Coordinate with the supporting TSCM program manager to ensure only trained and
qualified personnel operate the in-place monitoring equipment.

   e. Ensure the operational plan includes reporting procedures for discovery of actual or
suspected technical surveillances and hazards in accordance with this instruction and supporting
TSCM organizational requirements.

   f. Dispose of in-place monitoring systems in accordance with section 5.


5. TSCM EQUIPMENT, PROCUREMENT, AND DISPOSITION. Before disposing of excess
TSCM equipment, DoD Component TSCM organizations will:

  a. Offer the equipment to other DoD Component TSCM organizations and then to national
TSCM organizations, in accordance with appropriate DoD policy.

   b. Demilitarize TSCM equipment that reveals countermeasures capabilities or limitations
and is declared obsolete and identified for disposal in accordance with DoD Component
procedures.

   c. Remove identifying marks that associate the equipment with TSCM.


6. SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES. Personnel who must process sensitive or classified
information while outside of secure or controlled facilities will:

   a. Consult with the supporting TSCM program manager to identify the type and level of
required TSCM support.

   b. Use secure voice and data equipment to transmit sensitive and classified information.

    c. Employ countermeasures as recommended by the supporting TSCM organization based
on specific threat information.

  d. Conduct TSCM at classified meetings and conferences in accordance with Volume 3 of
DoD Manual 5200.01 (Reference (l)).


7. INVOLVEMENT WITH NON-DoD AGENCIES

    a. TSCM practitioners may conduct TSCM with non-DoD federal agencies after approval by
the appropriate authority.

                                                12
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                       ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                     DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014



        (1) The TSCM program manager will coordinate with the appropriate legal counsel and
notify the Director, DIA, or designee.

      (2) The TSCM program manager will report the conduct of TSCM activities with non-
DoD agencies through the USD(I&S)-approved CI information system.

   b. Upon receipt of foreign military requests for the release or joint use of TSCM equipment
and techniques, TSCM program managers:

        (1) Must coordinate with the foreign disclosure officer and, as appropriate, the
international engagement office in accordance with Component procedures.

       (2) In Combatant Command, joint, or coalition force environments, concurrently
coordinate with the command CI coordinating authority and the Director, DIA.

   c. TSCM conducted outside of the continental United States in non-U.S. government
controlled areas will be coordinated in accordance with Director of Central Intelligence Directive
5/1P (Reference (m)) or its successor.




                                                13
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                   DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


                                       ENCLOSURE 4

                 ORGANIZATIONS AUTHORIZED TO CONDUCT TSCM

1. Organizations currently authorized to conduct the full range of TSCM, including acquiring,
possessing, and using equipment designed for the conduct of TSCM, are:

   a. Department of the Army

       (1) U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command

       (2) 650th Military Intelligence Group

       (3) United States Army Special Operations Command

   b. Department of the Navy

       (1) Naval Criminal Investigative Service

       (2) Marine Corps Intelligence

   c. Department of the Air Force Air Force Office of Special Investigations

   d. The Joint Staff

   e. The Joint Special Operations Command

   f. National Security Agency/Central Security Service

   g. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

   h. DIA

   i. Defense Threat Reduction Agency

   j. Missile Defense Agency

   k. National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency

   l. National Reconnaissance Office

   m. Pentagon Force Protection Agency

   n. White House Communications Agency

   o. United States Special Operations Command (Central)

                                               14
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                    ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


2. Other DoD Components may be given authority to conduct the full range of TSCM, as
authorized by USD(I&S) memorandums or under the authority referenced in section 3 of
Enclosure 2.




                                            15
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                ENCLOSURE 4
                                                                    DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


                                        ENCLOSURE 5

       TSCM SUPPORT TO DoD COMPONENTS WITHOUT A TSCM CAPABILITY

The tables in this enclosure establish the TSCM relationship between the supporting TSCM
organizations from Enclosure 4 and the supported organizations. These relationships are for the
use of TSCM only, as established in this instruction, and are separate from the relationships
between the MDCOs and supported headquarters established in Reference (d).

 Table 1. Supporting TSCM Organizations to the Defense Agency Headquarters and the OSD
                                         Staff

       Supporting TSCM Organizations              Defense Agency Headquarters and the OSD
                                                                       Staff
 U. S. Army Intelligence and Security            Defense Commissary Agency
 Command                                         Defense Contract Management Agency
                                                 Defense Contract Audit Agency
                                                 Defense Logistics Agency
                                                 Defense Security Service
                                                 Secretary of Defense Travel Support
 Naval Criminal Investigative Service            Defense Finance and Accounting Service
 Air Force Office of Special Investigations      Defense Information Systems Agency
                                                 Office of the Inspector General of the
                                                 Department of Defense
                                                 Defense Security Cooperation Agency
 Pentagon Force Protection Agency                All OSD Staff Offices other than those listed
                                                 in this enclosure assigned to other TSCM
                                                 organizations. These offices include:

                                                 Washington Headquarters Services
                                                 Offices of the Under Secretaries
                                                 Offices of the Assistant Secretaries
                                                 Defense Media Activity
                                                 Office of Economic Adjustment




                                              16
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                     ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                   DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


     Table 2. Supporting TSCM Organizations to the Combatant Command Headquarters

        Supporting TSCM Organizations                   Combatant Command Headquarters
 U. S. Army Intelligence and Security              United States Africa Command
 Command                                           United States European Command
                                                   United States Southern Command
                                                   United States Forces Korea
 Naval Criminal Investigative Service              United States Pacific Command
 Air Force Office of Special Investigations        United States Northern Command
                                                   United States Strategic Command
                                                   United States Transportation Command
                                                   United States Special Operations Command
                                                   United States Central Command
 National Security Agency                          United States Cyber Command

       Table 3. Supporting TSCM Organizations to the DoD Field Activity Headquarters

        Supporting TSCM Organizations               DoD Field Activity Headquarters
 U. S. Army Intelligence and Security          Defense Technical Information Center
 Command
 Naval Criminal Investigative Service          DoD Test Resource Management Center
                                               DoD Education Activity
                                               TRICARE Management Activity
                                               DoD Human Resources Activity
 Air Force Office of Special Investigations    Defense Prisoner of War/Missing Persons
                                               Office
                                               Defense Technology Security Administration




                                              17
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                   ENCLOSURE 5
                                                                     DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


                                         ENCLOSURE 6

                                  DoD TSCM IMG CHARTER


1. PURPOSE. The TSCM IMG, the principal forum for information sharing among TSCM
practitioners, collaborates with its membership to identify TSCM-related issues and helps
propose solutions to those issues.


2. MEMBERSHIP

   a. The Director, DIA, appoints the chair.

   b. The TSCM IMG is composed of representatives of the TSCM organizations, the
DIRNSA/CHCSS RDT&E, and the ITC.

   c. The chair may allow non-voting observers, including other full-time or permanent part-
time federal employees.


3. MEETINGS

   a. The TSCM IMG meets at least quarterly.

    b. The chair publishes the meeting agenda at least 1 week prior to any meeting based on
input provided by the members. When agenda items pertain to RDT&E, training, or exercise
activities, the National Security Agency/Central Security Service representative will chair that
portion of the meeting.


4. ACTIVITIES. The TSCM IMG:

   a. Shares information among DoD TSCM practitioners.

    b. Identifies DoD-wide TSCM problems and works collectively to provide potential
solutions.

   c. Provides input and feedback to DDI(I&S) regarding TSCM policy.

   d. Recommends to the Director, DIA, resource and performance measurement standards.

    e. Recommends applicant entrance training requirements, as well as TSCM training topics to
the Director, ITC.

   f. Assists the DIRNSA/CHCSS in developing TSCM practitioner certification standards.

                                                18
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                      ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


   g. At least annually, conducts a dedicated TSCM IMG, chaired by the representative of the
DIRNSA/CHCSS, to review and discuss TSCM training (including course curriculum), RDT&E,
and exercises.

   h. Identifies core TSCM equipment.

    i. Establishes, with the consent of the TSCM IMG membership, minimum standards for
personnel entering the TSCM field.

    j. Develops community-level proactive TSCM methodologies to combat the foreign
technical surveillance threat.

   k. Serves as the gateway for TSCM issues from the Components to the DoD
counterterrorism and HUMINT governance process.




                                            19
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                 ENCLOSURE 6
                                                                       DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


                                            GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 CI                   counterintelligence


 DIA                  Defense Intelligence Agency
 DIRNSA/CHCSS         Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service
 DoDD                 DoD directive
 DoDI                 DoD instruction
 DDI(I&S)             Deputy Director for Intelligence (Intelligence & Security)


 FIE                  foreign intelligence entity


 HUMINT               human intelligence


 ITC                  Interagency Training Center
 ITEL                 Interagency Test and Evaluation Laboratory


 MDCO                 Military Department counterintelligence organization


 RDT&E                research, development, test, and evaluation


 TSCM                 technical surveillance countermeasures
 TSCM IMG             technical surveillance countermeasures Integrated Management Group

 USD(I&S)             Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security

                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

hazard or hazardous condition. A condition, either technical or physical, that could permit the
exfiltration and exploitation of information.

proactive TSCM. CI-focused TSCM targeting using a risk-based approach with the goal of
identifying and exploiting technical collection efforts targeting DoD interests.




                                                    20
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                          GLOSSARY
                                                                     DoDI 5240.05, April 3, 2014


surveillance device. A piece of equipment or mechanism used to gain unauthorized access to
and removal of information

technical surveillance. The use of optical, audio, or electronic monitoring devices or systems to
surreptitiously collect information.

technical threat analysis. A continual process of compiling and examining information on
technical surveillance activities against personnel, information, operations, and resources.

TSCM. Techniques to detect, neutralize, and exploit technical surveillance technologies and
hazards that permit the unauthorized access to or removal of information.

TSCM practitioner. An individual trained and certified to conduct all TSCM activities within
DoD.

TSCM technician. An individual trained to perform limited TSCM activities under the oversight
of a TSCM practitioner.

TSCM equipment. Equipment or mechanisms used to identify the presence of surveillance
devices. TSCM includes general purpose, specialized, or fabricated equipment to determine the
existence and capability of surveillance devices.




                                                21
Change 2, 08/27/2020                                                          GLOSSARY
