                              Department of Defense
                                    DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 5535.02
                                                                                 March 24, 2010
                                                            Incorporating Change 1, July 28, 2017

                                                                                           USD(P)

SUBJECT:      DoD Patent Security Review Process

References: (a) DoD Directive 5535.2, “Delegations of Authority to the Secretaries of the
                Military Departments – Inventions and Patents,” October 16, 1980 (hereby
                cancelled)
            (b) Sections 181-188 of title 35, United States Code
            (c) Section 906 of Public Law 105-85, “National Defense Authorization Act for
                Fiscal Year 1998,” November 18, 1997
            (d) DoD Manual 5200.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Security Program:
                Overview, Classification, and Declassification,” February 24, 2012, as
                amended


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

   a. Reissues and retitles Reference (a).

    b. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for the DoD patent security review process
in accordance with Reference (b).

    c. Delegates authority under sections 181, 182, and 184 of Reference (b) to the Secretaries of
the Military Departments and the Director, Defense Technology Security Administration
(DTSA).

   d. Implements Reference (c).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).
                                                                 DoDD 5535.02, March 24, 2010


3. DEFINITIONS. These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

   a. disclosure of an invention. The publication of a patent application or other written
communication, or the grant of a patent, that describes an invention.

   b. patent application. An application for a U.S. patent filed with the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (USPTO).

    c. secrecy order. An order by the Commissioner for Patents, USPTO, requiring an inventor
that has filed a patent application with the USPTO to keep the invention described therein secret,
where the determination to impose such an order requires the Commissioner for Patents to
withhold the publication of the patent application or the grant of a patent therefore while the
order remains in effect.

    d. U.S. Government property interest. Ownership of all or some rights in the invention by
the U.S. Government, including where the U.S. Government is entitled only to the interest of one
or more co-inventors.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. Patent security reviews as required by Reference (b) shall be expeditiously and accurately
performed by individuals knowledgeable as to whether disclosure of an invention:

      (1) Might be detrimental to national security, in cases in which there is a U.S.
Government property interest; or

      (2) Would be detrimental to national security, in cases in which there is no U.S.
Government property interest.

    b. The Secretaries of the Military Departments, for patent security reviews assigned to them
under the patent security review process, and the Director, DTSA, acting on patent security
reviews assigned to the other DoD Components, are delegated the authorities of the Secretary of
Defense under sections 181, 182, and 184 of Reference (b) with respect to the secrecy of certain
inventions and the withholding of patents.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure.


6. INFORMATION COLLECTIONS. Patent applications and other information relating to
inventions on which a secrecy order has been imposed shall be evaluated, processed, and
handled, as appropriate, in accordance with Volume 1 of DoD Manual 5200.01 (Reference (d)).




Change 1, 07/28/2017                        2
                                                            DoDD 5535.02, March 24, 2010


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective March 24, 2010.




Enclosure
   Responsibilities




Change 1, 07/28/2017                     3
                                                                  DoDD 5535.02, March 24, 2010


                                          ENCLOSURE

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)). The USD(P) shall develop
and provide guidance for, and oversee the execution of, the DoD patent security review process.


2. DIRECTOR, DTSA. The Director, DTSA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(P), in addition to the responsibilities in section 3 of this enclosure and in accordance with
Reference (c), shall:

   a. Manage the DoD patent security review process.

    b. Maintain a database management system to facilitate DoD review of patent applications
received from the USPTO.

     c. Coordinate the periodic update of the Patent Security Category Review List, which is the
list of technologies for which DoD Components have requested the opportunity to review for
secrecy order recommendations.

   d. In coordination with the Heads of the DoD Components, develop detailed implementation
guidance outlining the patent security review process to be followed by the DoD Components.

   e. Address any related patent security review process issues within the DoD Components or
with the USPTO.

   f. Implement the authority delegated in paragraph 4.b. above the signature of this Directive.


3. HEADS OF THE DoD COMPONENTS. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

    a. Review patent applications related to their DoD Component. Determine if disclosure of
an invention in which the U.S. Government has a property interest might be detrimental to
national security. Notify the Commissioner for Patents and the Director, DTSA, of DoD
recommendations for the imposition of secrecy orders.

    b. Review patent applications (made available for inspection by the Commissioner of
Patents) in which the U.S. Government does not have a property interest. Determine if the
disclosure of inventions described therein would be detrimental to national security. Notify
Director, DTSA, of recommendations for the imposition of secrecy orders.

   c. Establish Component process and procedures for the security review of patent
applications.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                         4                              ENCLOSURE
                                                                  DoDD 5535.02, March 24, 2010


   d. Assign responsibilities within their Component for implementing the process and
procedures for the security review of patent applications.

   e. Allocate adequate Component staff and resources to review patent applications properly.

   f. Ensure Component security reviews are completed in compliance with prescribed
timelines.

    g. Manage secrecy orders imposed by the Commissioner for Patents, USPTO, based on the
Component’s recommendation, including an annual reevaluation of the continued need for those
secrecy orders and support for any litigation involving those secrecy orders.

   h. Promptly inform Director, DTSA, of any issues impacting the patent review process.


4. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments, in addition to the responsibilities outlined in section 3 of this enclosure, shall
implement the authorities delegated to them in paragraph 4.b. above the signature of this
Directive.




Change 1, 07/28/2017                         5                              ENCLOSURE
