                           Department of Defense
                             INSTRUCTION

                                                                            NUMBER 2000.28
                                                                            November 14, 2013
                                                   Incorporating Change 1 Effective May 1, 2020

                                                                                          USD(P)

SUBJECT:     DoD Policy and Responsibilities Relating to the Regional Defense Combating
             Terrorism Fellowship Program (CTFP)

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with section 2249c of Title 10, United States Code (Reference (a))
and the authority in DoD Directive 5111.1 (Reference (b)), the 2012 Defense Strategic Guidance
(Reference (c)), and Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (d)), this instruction:

   a. Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures for the Regional
Defense CTFP.

    b. Incorporates and cancels the guidance in Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special
Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict (ASD(SO/LIC)) Memorandums (References (e), (f), and
(g)). The Regional Defense Combating Terrorism Fellowship Annual Guidance Message
(Reference (h)) will provide additional guidance on an annual basis.


2. APPLICABILITY. This instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
U.S. Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a service in the Department of Homeland
Security by agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (referred to collectively in this
instruction as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

    a. The Regional Defense CTFP will be used as a DoD security cooperation tool that directly
supports U.S. and DoD combating terrorism (CbT) activities, unified action with partners,
overseas contingency operations, theater security cooperation objectives, and OSD priorities.
The program will develop unique and specific engagement, integrated with other tools of
national power, and CbT education and institution-building opportunities with partner nations
                                                               DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


that emphasize non-military means and military-to-military cooperation to address instability and
reduce the demand for significant U.S. force commitments. Security force assistance is an
important tool of national security and defense policy, and is an integral element of the DoD
mission. In support of Reference (c), it is imperative to work creatively with interagency and
international partners to offset decreased resources for national security.

   b. The Regional Defense CTFP will:

        (1) Develop and strengthen the institutional CbT capacity of key defense and security
officials of partner nations through strategic- and operational-level education and training for
understanding the methodologies and ideologies of terrorists and the mix of direct and indirect
ways and means to counter them.

       (2) Counter global and regional ideological support for terrorism and violent extremism.

        (3) Harmonize global views, while emphasizing regional considerations, about the threat
of terrorism and its evolution.

        (4) Enable mutual understanding of CbT and counter-insurgency doctrine, outlook, and
best practices.

        (5) Build and strengthen a global network of CbT experts and practitioners committed to
participation in support of U.S. efforts against terrorists and terrorist organizations.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. PROCEDURES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The change to this issuance updates references and removes
expiration language in accordance with current Chief Management Officer of the Department of
Defense direction.




                                                2
Change 1, 05/01/2020
                                                        DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This instruction is effective November 14, 2013.




                                            James N. Miller
                                            Under Secretary of Defense for Policy

Enclosures:
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
   3. Procedures
Glossary




                                           3
Change 1, 05/01/2020
                                                                         DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


                                               ENCLOSURE 1

                                                REFERENCES

(a) Title 10, United States Code
(b) DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),”
    December 8, 1999
(c) DoD Strategic Guidance, “Sustaining U.S. Global Leadership: Priorities for 21st Century
    Defense,” January 3, 2012
(d) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,”
    November 30, 2006
(e) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict
    Memorandum, “Regional Defense Counterterrorism Fellowship Program Interim
    Guidance,” May 23, 2005 (hereby cancelled)
(f) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict and
    Interdependent Capabilities Memorandum, “Regional Defense Counterterrorism
    Fellowship Program Interim Guidance Memorandum No. 2,” December 9, 2005 (hereby
    cancelled)
(g) Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict and
    Interdependent Capabilities Memorandum, “Regional Defense Counterterrorism
    Fellowship Program Interim Guidance Memorandum No. 3,” May 1, 2006 (hereby
    cancelled)
(h) Regional Defense Combating Terrorism Fellowship Annual Guidance Message, current
    edition 1




1
 Available from the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict,
2500 Defense Pentagon, Room 5E368, Washington, DC 20301, (703) 697-3150.


Change 1, 05/01/2020                                    4                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                              DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASD(SO/LIC). Under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense
for Policy (USD(P)), the ASD(SO/LIC) is the principal staff assistant and advisor to the
Secretary of Defense on CTFP matters. As such, the ASD(SO/LIC):

   a. Sets CTFP program goals and objectives.

   b. Develops an annual CTFP plan, budget, and review to ensure priorities align with CTFP
program goals and objectives.

   c. Ensures that CTFP guidance is synchronized with DoD security cooperation activities,
pursuant to Reference (h).

   d. Ensures that CTFP guidance is consistent and synchronized with DoD policy guidance
and priorities.

    e. Complies with all resource allocation policies and laws in preparation of reprogramming
actions in support of the annual CTFP plan and budget.

   f. Approves funding reallocating actions within the CTFP budget.

    g. Represents CTFP in DoD policy and interagency groups and establishes interagency
relationships and initiatives in support of CbT education and training.

   h. To the extent possible, integrates CTFP guidance and priorities with priorities of other
security force assistance and unified action programs.

   i. Through the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Combating
Terrorism (DASD(SO/CT)), provides direction to the geographic Combatant Commands on the
execution of the CTFP Program.

   j. Through DASD(SO/CT), and in coordination with the Director, Defense Security
Cooperation Agency (DSCA), and the Office of the General Counsel of the Department of
Defense, approves each proposed CTFP education and training course or event, and the
candidates for participation in such course or event.

   k. Through DASD(SO/CT), assesses program outputs and outcomes.

   l. In collaboration with the DSCA, prepares and submits the annual CTFP report to Congress
and the CTFP portion of the Foreign Military Training Report to Congress.




Change 1, 05/01/2020                            5                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


2. DIRECTOR, DSCA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P), the Director,
DSCA provides administrative and financial support in the execution of the CTFP program and:

  a. In coordination with the ASD(SO/LIC), ensures that CTFP matters are represented at the
DoD regional centers, DoD schools, and the Combatant Commands.

  b. Assists the ASD(SO/LIC) in the execution of procedures for the selection and training of
DoD personnel for participation in CTFP-funded activities.

    c. Communicates directly with DoD Component heads on CTFP matters over which DSCA
has responsibility.

    d. Assists the ASD(SO/LIC) with the integration of the CTFP into the security force
assistance and unified action activities of the Combatant Commands consistent with
ASD(SO/LIC) program goals and objectives.

   e. Manages the budget execution for all CTFP-funded activities.

   f. Develops methods for building a CbT network among DoD partners (other government
agencies, partner nations, intergovernmental organizations, etc.).

   g. Provides the ASD(SO/LIC) a quarterly program review on CTFP execution, including a
view of the next quarter’s scheduled events and travel schedule.

   h. Integrates, as practical, CTFP activities with other security cooperation unified action
programs.

   i. Develops, reviews, authorizes, and manages dispersal and use of CTFP budget materials
and allocates resources, as directed by the DASD(SO/CT).

   j. Works collaboratively with the ASD(SO/LIC) to ensure that CTFP funds are obligated in
compliance with applicable guidance found in Reference (h).

   k. Executes financial management of the CTFP and ensure CTFP financial accountability.

   l. Manages the Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR) supporting CTFP contracts.

   m. Collects data and supports the DASD(SO/CT) in the assessment of program outputs and
outcomes.

   n. Captures appropriate student and country data necessary for the DASD(SO/CT) and
prepares the annual CTFP report to Congress, as well as the CTFP data portion of the annual
Foreign Military Training Report to Congress.




Change 1, 05/01/2020                            6                         ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


3. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS, COMMANDANT OF THE U.S.
COAST GUARD, AND DIRECTORS OF DOD REGIONAL CENTERS. The Secretaries of
the Military Departments, the Commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard, and the Directors of DoD
regional centers, through their respective security assistance training activities, notify,
administer, execute, and provide financial support for all CTFP-related activities, as needed.


4. COMBATANT COMMANDERS (CCDRs). The CCDRs:

   a. Provide country training and project priorities related to CbT to the ASD(SO/LIC) for
consideration in the development of the annual CTFP budget-allocation process.

    b. Develop annual CTFP execution plans in their areas of responsibility consistent with
ASD(SO/LIC) annual policy and budget guidance, including a description of how this fellowship
will develop specific networks and relationships between U.S. special operations forces officers
and their host nation counterparts. Such guidance will be provided prior to the Security
Cooperation Education Training Working Groups sessions.




Change 1, 05/01/2020                           7                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


                                          ENCLOSURE 3

                                          PROCEDURES


1. CTFP-FUNDED EDUCATION AND TRAINING

    a. CTFP-funded education is a mixture of existing traditional programs and activities
designed to strengthen individual, country, and regional CbT capabilities and capacities,
according to the priorities of the Secretary of Defense.

    b. CbT training may not be provided at the tactical level, but is restricted to the strategic and
operational levels. Activities may be conducted at U.S. military educational institutions, DoD
regional centers, conferences, seminars, mobile education units, or other education programs.

    c. The CTFP is focused on CbT education for mid-level to senior-level foreign military
officers (senior non-commissioned officers may participate, as appropriate, and as approved by
the ASD (SO/LIC)); ministry of defense officials; and security officials with CbT
responsibilities. All participants must:

       (1) Be vetted for human rights abuses, as required by annual appropriations acts (in a
provision also referred to as the Leahy Amendment).

       (2) Currently hold positions as foreign military officers, ministry of defense officials, or
foreign government security officials. Steps must be taken to ensure that access to training and
education is limited to those eligible and approved to receive CTFP-funded training.

   d. A prerequisite for CTFP funding for an educational activity is that the event will provide
unique CbT education, as identified by a CCDR and approved by the ASD(SO/LIC). The CTFP
may pay for all costs associated with providing education, including but not limited to:

       (1) Instructors.

       (2) Transportation.

       (3) Local travel and food.

       (4) Related orientation programs (such as English language training).

       (5) Course curriculum development.

       (6) Program management (e.g., translation, printing).

    e. DoD regional centers, DoD schools, Military Departments, the U.S. Coast Guard, and
other stakeholders that make use of CTFP funding must abide by the requirements and guidance




Change 1, 05/01/2020                              8                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


called for within the approved CTFP-proposal documents. Funding of major events must be
presented using the updated CTFP-proposal template.

    f. CTFP invitational courses are those courses that have approved CbT content and have a
portion of their seats set aside for qualified CTFP students. In return, the CTFP guarantees an
annual funding quota for the institutions that offer these courses. The funding is to be used
exclusively for CTFP participation.

      (1) Invitations are allocated based on country requirements and Combatant Command
recommendations, with final decisions made by the ASD(SO/LIC).

       (2) Any remaining seats may be funded with CTFP direct country allocations, with
Combatant Command CTFP discretionary funds, or with the International Military Education
and Training Program or other funds made available for this purpose.

       (3) Additional instructions for invitational courses will be provided by the ASD(SO/LIC)
in Reference (h), which is issued annually.

    g. On a case-by-case basis at a CCDR’s request, CTFP funding may be approved for a
targeted CbT education and training event. Such education and training are designed to address
a country need that is not met through existing training courses, activities and events, mobile
education teams, mobile training teams, or Regional Center programs. However, such training
must contain a substantive education component, and may not simply be a “meet-and-greet”
activity or a distinguished visitor orientation tour.

    h. CTFP funds may not be used to fund directly the costs of developing or presenting
courses sponsored by non-DoD entities, but may properly pay for tuition-type costs chargeable
for students on a per-student basis or a fair and balanced basis that represents a proportionate
share of allowable costs.

   i. Additional requirements and restrictions applicable to CTFP programs are included in
Reference (h), which is issued annually.


2. CTFP SECURITY COOPERATION

    a. Security cooperation offices (SCOs) and other country team entities within the CCDR
area of responsibility must include key CbT country requirements in the Combined Education
and Training Program Plans that will be developed and approved by the CCDR. This process
must be carried out in a timely manner so as to allow for advance planning and maximum
flexibility to accommodate country requests.

    b. Security cooperation and assistance activities, including the selection and training of
CTFP nominations and funding of CTFP activities, must be executed with the same high degree
of attention, efficiency, and sensitivity that is applied to other DoD activities, with the objective
of building positive relationships with partner nations.



Change 1, 05/01/2020                              9                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013




3. EXCEPTIONS. CTFP funds must not be used:

   a. To fund the equipping of foreign governments.

   b. For construction purposes, including procuring equipment to be used for construction.

   c. For lethal training, joint combat exercises, or other types of combat training.

   d. For social events or receptions.

   e. For any item exceeding the investment-item unit-cost ceiling for operation and
maintenance appropriations, currently $250,000.

    f. For participation of U.S. Government officials unless they are administrators or instructors
for courses or training events.


4. CTFP FUNDS. CTFP funds may be used to:

    a. Fund the costs of facility rentals. They may also be used to fund lunch and light
refreshments in accordance with DoD and U.S. Government regulations.

    b. Purchase books and training materials to the extent that these materials are required for
specific CbT education and training. In the case of language instruction, CTFP funds may be
used to fund the attendance of students, and to purchase materials (e.g., books, audio tapes, quiz
kits, and laboratory activity texts), provided that the materials are being used by students who are
scheduled to attend CbT education and training.


5. STUDENT ELIGIBILITY FOR INVITATIONAL AND INDIVIDUAL TRAINING

   a. Candidates must:

       (1) Meet the eligibility requirements of the institution offering the training program.

       (2) Meet the English language requirement of the training program (i.e., receive the
minimum required English Comprehension Level score or equivalent) or receive an English
language waiver from the participating institution.

        (3) Receive a human rights verification by the Department of State (DOS) before
attendance may be authorized. The verification, if favorable, should read as follows:
“DOS/Embassy verifies that it possesses no credible information of gross violations of human
rights by the individual or unit participating in this training.”




Change 1, 05/01/2020                            10                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                 DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


    b. Candidates should be mid-level to senior-level foreign military personnel or applicable
civilian security officials who currently have positions or duties directly related to CbT or
security in their countries, and whose post-education duties are expected to relate directly and
substantially to CbT or security. This includes, but is not limited to, military officers and civilian
government security officials who will serve in a CbT or security-related unit and be assigned
operational and executive responsibility over CbT-related functions.

        (1) In general terms, a security official is a full or part-time government employee
(national, regional, or local) whose job involves security duties related to CbT. Qualifying
positions include, but are not limited to: police, border patrol, Coast Guard, customs, and
ministry of defense officials. A policymaker may be considered a security official, depending on
the responsibilities of the office and the policymaker’s individual portfolio.

        (2) Foreign disaster response and emergency preparedness personnel may be considered
security officials and, therefore, be eligible for CTFP funding if:

            (a) The personnel in question work for or are under the direction of an agency
responsible for responding to a mass casualty or mass care incident in the event of a terrorist
attack (not just natural disasters).

            (b) The mission of the agency and its authority for responding to a terrorist incident
are clearly defined.

           (c) CTFP training will substantively enhance the nominated person’s ability to
mitigate the effect of or the possibility of terrorist attacks.


6. GUIDELINES FOR DETERMINING PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY FOR MOBILE
COURSES

    a. CTFP funds may only be used to provide education for qualified CTFP students. To the
extent that other students receive education at a CTFP-funded course, any incremental costs
associated with the education of those students must be covered by other funding sources.

    b. Candidates should be mid-level to senior-level foreign military personnel, Ministry of
Defense officials, or security officials who currently have positions or duties directly related to
CbT or security in their countries, and whose post-education duties are expected to relate directly
and substantially to CbT or security. This includes, but is not limited to, military officers and
civilian government security officials who will serve in a CbT or security-related unit and be
assigned operational and executive responsibility over CbT-related functions.

    c. Candidates must receive a human rights verification by the DOS before attendance may be
authorized. The verification, if favorable, should read as follows: “DOS/Embassy verifies that it
possesses no credible information of gross violations of human rights by the individual or unit
participating in this training.”




Change 1, 05/01/2020                             11                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013



7. FORMULA FOR CANDIDATE EVALUATION

    a. In general, the ASD(SO/LIC) will employ the following 100-point scoring methodology
to evaluate candidate nominations.

       (1) Country: Up to 30 points will be awarded based on the country that is nominating
the candidate, with a clear preference for countries given higher priority in Reference (h) and
other DoD overseas contingency operations prioritization guidance.

       (2) Candidate: Up to 40 points will be awarded based on:

            (a) The candidate’s rank (with projected potential), with a clear preference for mid-
to senior-level candidates;

           (b) The candidate’s CbT duties (operational or strategic level);

           (c) The relevance of the proposed course to the candidate’s future positions.

        (3) Course: Up to 30 points will be awarded based on the nature of the course, including
the extent to which the course focuses on counterterrorism and has a strategic or operational
focus.

    b. Combatant Commands, offices of defense cooperation (ODC), and SCO should bear these
criteria in mind when seeking to program courses and when submitting candidate nominations to
ASD(SO/LIC) for approval. As a general rule, a score of 80 points or above would be required
for approval. Some exceptions may be possible if there are other compelling factors that might
suggest that CTFP funding is appropriate in a given case. When exceptions are requested,
Combatant Commands and ODCs and SCOs must provide sufficient detail to explain how the
request fulfills a CbT requirement and thus warrants approval. Such details are crucial when
CTFP funding is requested to support non-commissioned officers, warrant officers, and junior
officers, or to support tactical-level courses.

    c. The candidate evaluation carries the most weight in light of CTFP’s focus on
individualized education and training. Articulating the candidate’s relevance to the overall CbT
strategy and implementation aids in the decision process.


8. PROCEDURES FOR SELECTION OF STUDENTS

   a. The ODCs and SCOs will solicit individual candidates (working with applicable
ministries or agencies in the host country).

   b. The SCOs will confirm that the candidate meets all requirements (i.e., undergraduate
degree, requisite English language competence, human rights verification). In order to check the
“Ambassador approval” line on the Security Assistance Network Web (SANWeb) form, country



Change 1, 05/01/2020                            12                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


teams should have an internal approval process based on their individual embassy guidelines
(e.g., periodic briefings to the ambassador, ambassadorial signatures on individual nomination
packets, or delegated authority by the ambassador to the SCO).

   c. No later than 60 days prior to the course report date, the SCO will submit the candidate
nomination, including the human rights verification information, into the SANWeb. The
nomination will be forwarded to the Combatant Command CTFP manager. Country teams
should ensure they are aware of human rights verification procedures and average processing
times at their embassies and plan accordingly.

    d. No later than 45 days prior to the course report date, the Combatant Command CTFP
manager will obtain Combatant Command approval and forward the nomination to the Office of
the ASD(SO/LIC) via the SANWeb. Candidate nomination packets must be complete or they
will be sent back without review. Also, review of nominations may be slowed considerably
when obscure terms or acronyms are used and when the candidates’ unit missions are not
explained.

    e. The ASD(SO/LIC) will coordinate the nomination with CbT policy regional desks, Office
of the USD(P) regional desks, Joint Staff Strategic Plans and Policy Directorate (J5) regional
desks, and the Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense. The DASD(SO/CT)
will make the final decision.

   f. DSCA will enter the final approval in the SANWeb upon DASD (SO/CT) approval.

    g. The Combatant Command, the SCO, DSCA, and the applicable Military Department will
be notified of the final approval via an e-mail message generated by the SANWeb.

    h. Each fiscal quarter, DSCA pre-releases funds to the Military Departments, based on
courses programmed in the SANWeb. After the ASD(SO/LIC) gives final approval, the Military
Department will issue a fund cite to the SCO for the candidate’s travel, and release funding for
the course cost to the school.


9. PROCEDURES FOR PROGRAM ASSESSMENT

    a. In order to ensure that the DoD realizes sufficient return on investment of the CTFP, the
DSCA, in coordination with ODCs and SCOs, will assess the effectiveness of the CTFP by
determining the level of increasing cooperation of governments of foreign countries with the
United States in the National Counterterrorism Strategy.

    b. The ODCs and SCOs will report to the DSCA the results of seminars, courses, and
workshops through an annual review of the expansion of the CbT network, the number of
returning students to CTFP-sponsored events, and an evaluation of CTFP alumni in subsequent
assignments, including training events, operations, activities with other members of the CbT
network, and their successful attempts to counter ideological support for terrorism and violent
extremism.



Change 1, 05/01/2020                            13                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                            DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013



  c. This assessment will be included in the annual report to Congress, and used by the
ASD(SO/LIC) to inform actions taken to improve the program.




Change 1, 05/01/2020                          14                       ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 2000.28, November 14, 2013


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I: ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ASD(SO/LIC)        Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-
                   Intensity Conflict

CbT                combating terrorism
CCDR               Combatant Commander
CTFP               Combating Terrorism Fellowship Program

DASD(SO/CT)        Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and
                   Combating Terrorism
DOS                Department of State
DSCA               Defense Security Cooperation Agency

ODC                office of defense cooperation

SANWeb             Security Assistance Network Web
SCO                security cooperation office

USD(P)             Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


                                     PART II: DEFINITIONS


These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this instruction.

Combined Education and Training Program Plan. A 2-year education and training plan for
security assistance that is approved by a CCDR.

DoD schools. DoD institutions for professional military education.




Change 1, 05/01/2020                             15                           GLOSSARY
