                               DOD DIRECTIVE 5118.03
     UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF
        FINANCIAL OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Originating Component:       Office of the Director of Administration and Management

Effective:                   April 4, 2023

Releasability:               Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division Website
                             at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Reissues and Cancels:        DoD Directive 5118.03, “Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief
                             Financial Officer, Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO),”
                             April 20, 2012, as amended

Approved by:                 Kathleen H. Hicks, Deputy Secretary of Defense


Purpose: This issuance updates the responsibilities and functions, relationships, and authorities of the
Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense
(USD(C)/CFO), pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by Sections 113 and 135 of
Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.).
                                                                                                    DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS .............................................................................. 4
SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS ............................................................................................................ 9
   3.1. USD(C)/CFO. ................................................................................................................... 9
   3.2. OSD PSAs and DoD Component Heads. ......................................................................... 9
SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES .............................................................................................................. 10
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 15
   G.1. Acronyms. ...................................................................................................................... 15
   G.2. Definitions...................................................................................................................... 15
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 17




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                                    DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY.

This issuance applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands (CCMDs), the Office of
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this
issuance as the “DoD Components”).




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                              3
                                                                      DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


                 SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS
The USD(C)/CFO is the Principal Staff Assistant (PSA) and advisor to the Secretary of Defense
for budgetary and financial matters. The USD(C)/CFO manages all functions and
responsibilities as assigned in Section 902 of Title 31, U.S.C. In this capacity, the USD(C)/CFO:

   a. Administers and provides analysis and recommendations for the budgeting and execution
phases of the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution process of the DoD, utilizing
advice from the Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation, in accordance with
DoD Directive (DoDD) 7045.14.

    b. Provides analyses, advice, and recommendations to the Under Secretary of Defense for
Policy and the Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation on matters relating to the
planning and programming phases of the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution
process.

   c. Directs the formulation and presentation of DoD budgets, the interactions with the Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Congress on budgetary and fiscal matters, and the
execution and control of approved budgets by maintaining effective control and accountability
over the use of all financial resources of the DoD.

    d. Establishes, supervises, and keeps current the execution of uniform DoD policies,
principles, and procedures, including DoD 7000.14-R, as necessary, for:

        (1) Budget formulation, presentation, and execution; reprogramming actions and
notifications; financial management programs and systems; and financial improvement and audit
remediation (FIAR).

         (2) Accounting and disbursing systems, including those for nonappropriated funds.

         (3) Accounting policy applicable to appropriated and nonappropriated fund retirement
plans.

        (4) Cash and credit management, debt collection, financial progress, financial data
analytics, and statistical reporting.

       (5) Duties involving enforcement of Sections 1341, 1342, and 1517 of Title 31, U.S.C.,
also known as “The Antideficiency Act”, in accordance with OMB Circular No. A-11 and
Volume 14 of DoD 7000.14-R.

         (6) Technical, organizational, and administrative matters related to contract audit.

        (7) Relationships with financial institutions, including those operating on DoD
installations in the United States and overseas.

      (8) International financial matters, including the adequacy of international financial
agreements.



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                         4
                                                                   DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


     (9) Prices for transactions involving the provision of goods and services by DoD
Components, including sales to foreign governments.

      (10) Access to DoD budgetary material and other records by the U.S. Government
Accountability Office.

   e. Conducts the Budget Review with OMB, in accordance with the May 24, 2021 Deputy
Secretary of Defense Memorandum.

   f. Serves as the Chief Financial Officer of the DoD and, in that capacity:

      (1) Oversees all financial management activities for the programs and the operation of
the DoD.

       (2) Oversees development and maintenance of integrated DoD accounting and financial
management systems, including financial reporting and management controls, which comply
with Title 31, U.S.C., and Section 552a of Title 5, U.S.C., also known as “The Privacy Act of
1974.”

       (3) Leads management of the consolidated DoD audit through periodic audit status
meetings, ensuring:

           (a) Provided-by-client requests are being answered in a timely way.

           (b) Appropriate documentation (e.g., engagement letters, legal letters, management
representation letters, notice of findings and recommendations) is processed in a timely way.

          (c) The auditors have all information necessary to reach a conclusion on the integrity
of the DoD’s consolidated financial statements and footnotes.

       (4) Provides oversight of all DoD Component audits and ensures they are accomplished
through similar means as the DoD’s consolidated audit.

        (5) Directs, manages, and provides policy guidance for and oversight of DoD financial
management personnel, activities, and operations, to include implementation of DoD asset
management systems, including systems for cash management, credit management, debt
collection, and property and inventory management control.

      (6) Monitors the financial execution of the DoD budget for actual obligations,
expenditures, and costs incurred.

      (7) Monitors, in consultation with the Office of the Director of National Intelligence
(ODNI), the execution of the DoD portion of the National Intelligence Program (NIP).

       (8) Prepares and submits to the Congress, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Government
Accountability Office, and the Director of OMB timely financial reports, including the DoD
Agency Financial Report (to include the annual DoD financial statements and the audit report),
as required by OMB Circular No. A-136.


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                       5
                                                                      DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


        (9) Reviews, at least every 2 years, the fees, royalties, rents, and other charges imposed
by the DoD for services and things of value it provides and recommends revising those charges
to reflect costs incurred by the DoD in providing those services and things of value.

       (10) Co-leads, as designated by the DSD, governance bodies overseeing management or
reform processes:

           (a) To implement the Secretary’s Management and Defense Reform Agendas.

           (b) To support implementation of the National Defense Strategy.

          (c) To vet defense management and performance improvement issues, to include
DoD requirements for audit compliance.

    g. Directs improvements and establishes policies that lead to unmodified audit opinions,
including those related to internal controls over financial reporting. Chairs the FIAR
Governance Board and oversees reporting to the Congress on FIAR issues, in accordance with
Section 240b of Title 10, U.S.C.

    h. Reviews, evaluates, and manages financial systems in support of DoD information
management and life-cycle programs, including the development, improvement, and
maintenance of data standards. Establishes policies and procedures to ensure accounting,
financial, and asset management systems and other related DoD information solutions are
designed, developed, maintained, and used, pursuant to Section 11316 of Title 40, U.S.C., and in
accordance with DoDD 8000.01.

    i. Provides guidance and oversight for all matters relating to common enterprise financial
data and its repository, financial data standards, and the linkages of financial data to program and
performance aspects of DoD business operations. The USD(C)/CFO:

       (1) Develops and implements the DoD’s financial management data strategy, leveraging
technology and data analytics to enhance mission effectiveness and efficiency, auditability, and
business insights and outcomes.

       (2) Monitors enterprise execution in support of the National Defense Strategy.

       (3) Supports the integration and coordination of DoD-wide business and financial
systems and processes, ensuring that transformation requirements are aligned with Secretary of
Defense goals.

        (4) Leads or supports DoD special projects to address key business and financial
management issues or priorities that involve financial enterprise data needs for performance
management, cost management, affordability, financial audit, analytics, or transparency
reporting.

        (5) Identifies opportunities for CFO data transformation and process automation across
the enterprise, supporting efforts by the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer to extract
and analyze data to promote business reforms and audit recommendations.


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                            6
                                                                   DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


   j. Provides for the design, development, and installation of financial systems and for
management improvement programs throughout the DoD, especially those related to financial
management. The USD(C)/CFO:

      (1) Advises and assists the Director of Administration and Management on
implementation of performance goals in Section 1115 of Title 31, U.S.C.

       (2) Oversees the Risk Management and Internal Control Program (RMIC) for the DoD,
in accordance with OMB Circular No. A-123, DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5010.40, and the
January 17, 2017 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum to control waste, fraud, loss,
mismanagement, and inefficiency. Evaluates internal control over financial reporting and
financial systems assessment areas of the RMIC, fraud analytics, and the financial risk category
of Enterprise Risk Management.

       (3) Promotes accuracy and reliability in accounting and operating data.

        (4) Develops, disseminates, and monitors execution of quarterly, annual, and long-term
performance goals, including measures and milestones, for DoD contract audit administration
and financial management improvement. Ensures annual and long-term goals are identified in
the Annual Performance Plan and the DoD Agency Strategic Plan. Maintains a metrics program
that links DoD strategy to results, with a focus on improvements in the performance of financial
management and financial statement audit results.

       (5) Serves as the lead integrator of enterprise data for use in financial management and
decision making processes. Leads the development and deployment of DoD enterprise financial
data and analytics applications. Develops data and workflow tools to automate financial and
performance reviews for use by senior DoD leadership.

    k. Serves as the PSA for the development, integration, implementation, and maintenance of
financial strategic plans, reengineering of financial practices, business information systems
architectures related to financial management, and related strategies. Reviews, approves, and
provides oversight of the planning, design, acquisition, deployment, operation, maintenance, and
modernization of financial defense business systems, pursuant to Section 2222 of Title 10,
U.S.C. Ensures preparation and validation of economic analyses in support of financial systems.

    l. Assesses financial management performance within the DoD and the responsiveness of
budgetary, fiscal, and management improvement products and services to the requirements of the
DoD Components, in coordination with the CJCS, when appropriate, and advises the Secretary
of Defense, accordingly.

    m. Provides guidance and oversight with regard to the recruiting, retention, training, and
professional development of the DoD financial management workforce, to include maintaining a
Functional Community Management Office, headed by a senior executive, to be responsible for
this function. Develops the DoD financial management strategic workforce plan and provides
oversight and policy guidance for workforce programs to include the DoD Financial
Management Certification Program, in accordance with Section 1599d of Title 10, U.S.C.

   n. Serves as the chair of the DoD Financial Management Senior Leader Group, which
oversees financial management workforce program policy, in accordance with DoDI 1300.26,

SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                          7
                                                                      DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


and the Defense Resource Management Institute Policy Guidance Council, in accordance with
DoDI 5010.35.

   o. Advises and assists the Secretary of Defense on improving event-specific financial
reporting (e.g., cost of war reports) to enhance its credibility, transparency, and timeliness.

    p. Serves as the chair of boards and councils, with oversight of financial management
policies, practices, analytics, resources and systems, including the Defense Working Capital
Funds, in accordance with Section 2208 of Title 10, U.S.C.

    q. Advises and assists the Secretary of Defense on administration and organization of the
finance and accounting functions in the DoD.

   r. Advises and assists the Secretary of Defense on administration and organization of the
contract audit function within the DoD.

    s. Coordinates on all reports assigned to the Secretary of Defense by the Congress so that
those reports are consistent with DoD leadership policies, in accordance with the
September 10, 2018 Secretary of Defense Memorandum.

    t. Assists DoD Components in being audit ready, remediating notices of findings and
recommendations, and achieving post-audit sustainment.

   u. Develops and issues detailed FIAR strategy, plans, and guidance.

    v. Ensures that assigned policies and programs are designed and managed to improve
standards of performance, ethics, economy, and efficiency, and all of the Defense Agencies and
DoD Field Activities under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(C)/CFO are attentive
and responsive to the requirements of their organizational customers, both internal and external
to the DoD.

    w. Review the cost analysis for economically significant rules costing the public $100
million or more and significant rules costing the DoD $10 million or more, or when OMB has
questions concerning DoD’s financial resources related to a rule action.

   x. Periodically assesses the DoD Executive Agent assignments, under the cognizance of the
USD(C)/CFO, for continued need, currency, and effectiveness and efficiency in satisfying end-
user requirements, in accordance with DoDD 5101.01.

   y. Uses existing systems, facilities, and services of DoD and other Federal departments and
agencies, when possible, to avoid duplication and achieve maximum efficiency and economy.

   z. Performs such other duties as the Secretary may prescribe.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS                                                         8
                                                                  DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


                            SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS

3.1. USD(C)/CFO.

In performing their assigned responsibilities and functions, the USD(C)/CFO:

   a. Reports directly to the Secretary of Defense.

   b. Exercises authority, direction, and control over:

       (1) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller).

       (2) The Director, Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS).

       (3) The Director, Defense Contract Audit Agency.

       (4) Such other positions and organizations as may be established by the USD(C)/CFO,
consistent with applicable law, using resources provided by the Secretary of Defense.

  c. Maintains liaison with OMB on DoD budgetary and fiscal matters. Serves as the principal
DoD liaison with the regard to all budgetary and fiscal matters.

    d. Maintains liaison with Congressional Appropriations Committees on DoD budgetary and
fiscal matters. Serves as the principal DoD liaison with the Senate Appropriations Committee,
House Appropriations Committee, and the Congressional Budget Office.

    e. Advises on the professional qualifications of Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities
Comptrollers (or equivalents) before their selection to such positions. Participates, as
appropriate, in the hiring and performance evaluation processes for Defense Agencies and DoD
Field Activities Senior Executive Service chief financial executives in accordance with the
January 24, 2020 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum.

    f. Collaborates and exchanges information with other OSD officials on the RMIC for DoD,
to manage risk and maximize efficiencies.

   g. Coordinates and exchanges information with other OSD officials, the DoD Component
heads, and Federal, State, or local officials having collateral or related functions.


3.2. OSD PSAS AND DOD COMPONENT HEADS.

The OSD PSAs and DoD Component heads coordinate with the USD(C)/CFO on matters, under
their purview, related to the authorities, responsibilities, and functions assigned to the
USD(C)/CFO in this issuance.




SECTION 3: RELATIONSHIPS                                                                         9
                                                                     DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


                               SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to their authority,
direction, and control, and in accordance with DoD policies and issuances, the USD(C)/CFO is
hereby delegated authority to exercise, within assigned responsibilities and functions, all
authority of the Secretary of Defense derived from statute, Executive order (E.O.), or interagency
agreement, except where specifically limited by statute or E.O., to the Secretary of Defense. The
USD(C)/CFO is specifically delegated authority to:

    a. Establish DoD policy through DoDIs, directive-type memorandums (DTMs), and rules
published in the Federal Register, within the authorities and responsibilities assigned in this
issuance and in accordance with DoDI 5025.13.

       (1) In those documents, assign responsibilities related to the authorities and
responsibilities in this issuance to other OSD PSAs and the DoD Component heads. Assignment
of responsibilities in DoD issuances or rules published in the Federal Register to Military
Department officials must be made through the Secretaries of those Departments. DoD
issuances or rules published in the Federal Register assigning responsibilities to the CCMDs
must be coordinated with the CJCS.

       (2) DoDIs and DTMs must be fully coordinated, in accordance with DoDI 5025.01.
Rules published in the Federal Register must be fully coordinated with impacted OSD and DoD
Component heads and be consistent with Administrative Instruction 102.

       (3) This authority may not be redelegated.

   b. Approve other DoDIs, DoD manuals, and DTMs in areas of assigned responsibilities and
function that implement policy already established by a DoDD, DoDI, DTM, or policy
memorandum issued by the Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Defense.

       (1) In these documents, assign responsibilities related to the authorities and
responsibilities in this issuance to other OSD PSAs and the DoD Component heads. Assignment
of responsibilities in these DoD issuances to Military Department officials must be made through
the Secretaries of those Departments. DoD issuances assigning responsibilities to the CCMDs
must be coordinated with the CJCS.

       (2) Such documents must be fully coordinated, in accordance with DoDI 5025.01.

      (3) This authority may only be further delegated to subordinate officials, as specified in
DoDI 5025.01.

    c. Approve Federal Register publication of significant guidance documents as determined by
the OMB. This authority may not be delegated.

    d. Approve the Federal Register publication of documents other than rules and significant
guidance documents (e.g., notices, orders, and non-significant guidance documents as
determined by the OMB), in accordance with Administrative Instruction 102. Unless otherwise
restricted by law, this authority may be further delegated only in writing to subordinate officials


SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                            10
                                                                    DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


at or above the level of a general officer or flag officer, Senior Executive Service member, or
equivalent.

    e. Reissue, when necessary, in accordance with DoDI 5025.01, chartering DoDDs for those
OSD officials who were appointed by the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate,
and who are under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(C)/CFO. This authority may
not be redelegated. The Director of Administration and Management continues to develop and
maintain these chartering DoDDs, in accordance with DoDI 5025.01.

    f. Communicate directly with the DoD Component heads, as necessary, to carry out assigned
responsibilities and functions, including transmitting requests for advice and assistance. Except
as noted below, communications to the Military Departments must be transmitted through the
Secretaries of the Military Departments or as otherwise provided in law or directed by the
Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the CCMDs must be in
accordance with DoDD 5100.01.

    g. Communicate directly with the Assistant Secretaries of the Military Departments for
Financial Management and Comptroller and the senior financial management and comptroller
officials in all DoD Components, as necessary, to carry out assigned responsibilities and
functions, including transmitting requests for advice and assistance.

    h. Communicate with other government officials, members of the public, and representatives
of foreign governments, as appropriate, in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions.
Communications with representatives and members of the Legislative Branch must be conducted
through the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs, except for
communications with the Defense Appropriations Committees, where the Office of the
USD(C)/CFO serves as the principal DoD liaison.

    i. Obtain reports and information, in accordance with DoDI 8910.01, as necessary, to carry
out assigned responsibilities and functions.

   j. Establish arrangements for DoD participation in non-DoD governmental programs for
which the USD(C)/CFO is assigned primary DoD cognizance.

    k. Enter into support agreements, as required, for the effective performance of
responsibilities and functions assigned to the USD(C)/CFO, including support agreements
pursuant to DoDI 4000.19 or the February 13, 2020 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum.

    l. Approve or withhold authority to obligate and expend funds authorized and appropriated
by the Congress for the execution of DoD programs.

    m. Approve requests to hold cash at personal risk for authorized purposes, including imprest
funds, and to redelegate such authority, as appropriate, in the administration and control of DoD
funds, in accordance with provisions of the Treasury Financial Manual and pursuant to the
authority of Sections 3321 and 3342 of Title 31, U.S.C.

    n. Establish policy and assign responsibilities for the administration and management of
certifying officer and DoD accountable official functions within the DoD and its Components,


SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                            11
                                                                     DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


pursuant to the authority of Section 2773a of Title 10, U.S.C., and Sections 3325, 3527, 3528,
and 3529 of Title 31, U.S.C., to include the establishment of pecuniary liability of DoD
accountable officials and the approval of relief of certifying officers from pecuniary liability.

    o. Establish policy, assign responsibilities, and serve as the principal DoD liaison for all
matters related to the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Implement the relevant portions of the
Treasury Financial Manual within the DoD and grant waivers when delegated by the Secretary of
the Treasury to the heads of Executive departments and agencies.

    p. Approve the establishment of accounts for funds provided to the DoD, coordinating with
the ODNI and DoD Components, as appropriate, and issue regulations for the administration of
accounts established, pursuant to statutory authority.

    q. Establish reimbursement rates and prices for DoD goods and services and to approve
requests for waivers or reductions of such rates and prices that, by statute, may be exercised by
the Secretary of Defense.

    r. Make determinations to effect transfers under transfer authorities enacted in other statutes
and DoD and military construction appropriations and authorization acts. Provide any reports or
notifications to the Congress or its committees that may be required in connection with the
exercise of such transfers. This authority may not be redelegated. The transfer of NIP funds to,
from, and among DoD accounts, subject to the authorities of the Director of National
Intelligence, will be coordinated with the Director of National Intelligence.

    s. Authorize transfers of funds available for the Defense Commissary Agency to a
nonappropriated fund instrumentality to offset losses if a nonappropriated fund instrumentality
incurs a loss in operating a combined exchange and commissary store at a military installation as
a result of the requirement to make adjustments to, and surcharges on, the sales price of grocery
food items sold, pursuant to Section 2488(e) of Title 10, U.S.C.

    t. Approve all requests for reprogramming of funds, except as limited by Section 3024 of
Title 50, U.S.C., (also known as Section 102A of “The National Security Act of 1947, as
amended”), and provide any reports or notifications to the Congress or its Committees that may
be required in connection with such reprogrammings. This authority may not be redelegated.

    u. Transmit reports of Antideficiency Act violations, as required by Sections 1351 and
1517(b) of Title 31, U.S.C., OMB Circular No. A-11, and DoD 7000.14-R, to the OMB, the
President, and the Congress. This authority may not be redelegated. Coordinate on
Antideficiency Act violation reports involving NIP funds before ODNI transmits the reports to
the OMB, the President, and the Congress.

    v. Approve obligation adjustments and supervise and exercise all necessary authorities in
connection with the closing of accounts, pursuant to the provisions of Subchapter IV of
Chapter 15 of Title 31, U.S.C., and the transition provisions pertaining to the DoD that are
related to such provisions.

   w. Provide for the administration, receipt of payments and contributions, deposits to and
payments from special funds and accounts, and submission of reports on the status of such funds


SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                              12
                                                                     DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


and accounts to the Congress, in accordance with terms and conditions that are contained in the
provisions of Title 10, U.S.C., and annual appropriations and authorization acts. Such funds
include, but are not limited to:

       (1) The DoD Overseas Military Facility Investment Recovery Account.

       (2) The Base Realignment and Closure Accounts.

       (3) The Defense Cooperation Account.

       (4) The National Defense Sealift Fund.

       (5) The Voluntary Separation Incentive Fund.

   x. Provide fiscal oversight for defense and military intelligence activities in support of the
Secretary of Defense execution of responsibilities, in accordance with Part 1, 1.10(k) of
E.O. 12333.

   y. Accept gifts offered to the DoD, pursuant to Sections 2601 or 2608 of Title 10, U.S.C., or
other statutory authority.

   z. Notify the Congressional Defense Committees, pursuant to Section 127(c)(1) of Title 10,
U.S.C., of proposed obligations or expenditures of emergency and extraordinary expenses funds.

   aa. Notify the Congressional Defense Committees and the Congressional Intelligence
Committees, pursuant to Section 127(c)(4) of Title 10, U.S.C., of proposed obligations or
expenditures of funds for intelligence or counter-intelligence activities.

   ab. In matters pertaining to the operations and functions of the DFAS:

       (1) Waive a claim, pursuant to Subsection 5584(a)(2) of Title 5, U.S.C.; Subsection
2774(a)(2) of Title 10, U.S.C.; and Subsection 716(a)(2) of Title 32, U.S.C.; and make
recommendations, to the General Counsel of the Department of Defense, on the waiver of claims
under subsection (a)(1) of these provisions, in accordance with DoDD 1340.22.

       (2) Remit or cancel a Service member’s indebtedness, pursuant to Sections 7837, 8271,
and 9837 of Title 10, U.S.C.

        (3) Collect, compromise, suspend, or end collection action on claims arising out of the
activities of, or referred to, the DFAS, pursuant to Section 3711 of Title 31, U.S.C.

      (4) Request payment and certification decisions from the General Counsel of the
Department of Defense, pursuant to Section 3529 of Title 31, U.S.C.

         (5) Issue regulations establishing conditions under which reimbursements for financial
institution charges resulting from late or incorrect direct deposits will be made, pursuant to
Sections 1053 and 1594 of Title 10, U.S.C.




SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                              13
                                                                   DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


       (6) Designate a person to receive amounts when a Service member is determined to be
mentally incapable of managing their own affairs, pursuant to Section 602 of Title 37, U.S.C.,
and DoD 7000.14-R.

        (7) Make findings of good faith on purported marriages, pursuant to Section 423 of
Title 37, U.S.C.

        (8) Make dependency determinations for pay and allowance and medical care
entitlements, pursuant to DoDD 1340.22 and Chapter 55 of Title 10, U.S.C.

       (9) Make determinations necessary for the administration of missing persons’ accounts,
except determinations on missing status or death, pursuant to Chapter 10 of Title 37, U.S.C.

      (10) Make determinations necessary for the administration of the annuity plans covered
by Chapter 73 of Title 10, U.S.C.




SECTION 4: AUTHORITIES                                                                           14
                                                                     DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


                                          GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

 ACRONYM                   MEANING

 CCMD                      Combatant Command
 CJCS                      Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

 DFAS                      Defense Finance and Accounting Service
 DoDD                      DoD directive
 DoDI                      DoD instruction
 DTM                       directive-type memorandum

 E.O.                      Executive order

 FIAR                      financial improvement and audit remediation

 NIP                       National Intelligence Program

 ODNI                      Office of the Director of National Intelligence
 OMB                       Office of Management and Budget

 PSA                       Principal Staff Assistant

 RMIC                      Risk Management and Internal Control Program

 U.S.C.                    United States Code
 USD(C)/CFO                Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer,
                           Department of Defense


G.2. DEFINITIONS.

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

 TERM                      DEFINITION

 DoD executive agent       Defined in DoDD 5101.01.

 FIAR Governance           A governing body composed of the DoD’s most senior leaders from
 Board                     the financial management community. The Board is chaired by the
                           USD(C)/CFO and meets quarterly to review Component progress.
                           Additional key members are the Chief Management Officers of the
                           Military Departments with cross-community (business and financial)
                           responsibilities and authority to transform budget, finance and


GLOSSARY                                                                                          15
                                                               DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


TERM                    DEFINITION

                        accounting operations, and to eliminate or replace financial
                        management systems that are inconsistent with transformation.

military construction   Defined in the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms.




GLOSSARY                                                                                  16
                                                                  DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


                                      REFERENCES
Administrative Instruction 102, “Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) Federal Register (FR)
   System,” November 6, 2006, as amended
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Procedures and Schedule for FY 2023-FY 2027
   Program and Budget Reviews,” May 24, 2021
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegation of Authority for OSD Component
   Heads to Enter into Support Agreements,” February 13, 2020
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Defense-Wide Organizations Transition to Chief
   Management Officer Governance,” January 24, 2020
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Transfer of Responsibility for Internal Control
   over Operations,” January 17, 2017
DoD 7000.14-R, “Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation (DoD FMR),”
   date varies by volume
DoD Directive 1340.22, “Waiver of Debts Resulting from Erroneous Payments of Pay and
   Allowances,” January 8, 2005
DoD Directive 5100.01, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major Components,”
   December 21, 2010, as amended
DoD Directive 5101.01, “DoD Executive Agent,” February 7, 2022
DoD Directive 7045.14, “The Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE)
   Process,” January 25, 2013, as amended
DoD Directive 8000.01, “Management of the Department of Defense Information Enterprise
   (DoD IE),” March 17, 2016, as amended
DoD Instruction 1300.26, “Operation of the DoD Financial Management Certification Program,”
   January 31, 2017, as amended
DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” December 16, 2020
DoD Instruction 5010.35, “Defense Resources Management Institute (DRMI),” August 7, 2019
DoD Instruction 5010.40, “Managers’ Internal Control Program Procedures,” May 30, 2013,
   as amended
DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Issuances Program,” August 1, 2016, as amended
DoD Instruction 5025.13, “DoD Plain Language Program,” January 23, 2020, as amended
DoD Instruction 8910.01, “DoD Implementation of the Paperwork Reduction Act,”
   December 5, 2022
Executive Order 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” December 4, 1981, as amended
National Defense Strategy, current edition
Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-11, “Preparation, Submission, and Execution
   of the Budget,” August 15, 2022
Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-123, “Management’s Responsibility for
   Enterprise Risk Management and Internal Control,” July 15, 2016
Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-136, “Financial Reporting Requirements,”
   current edition



REFERENCES                                                                                  17
                                                                  DoDD 5118.03, April 4, 2023


Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated
   Terms,” current edition
Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Updated Guidance Concerning Coordination, Signature
   Authority, and Submission of Reports to Congress,” September 10, 2018
Treasury Financial Manual, current edition 1
United States Code, Title 5
United States Code, Title 10
United States Code, Title 31
United States Code, Title 32, Section 716(a)(2)
United States Code, Title 37
United States Code, Title 40, Section 11316
United States Code, Title 50, Section 3024 (also known as Section 102A of “The National
   Security Act of 1947,” as amended)




1
    Available at http://tfm.fiscal.treasury.gov


REFERENCES                                                                                   18
