                                  Department of Defense
                                    INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 1400.24
                                                                                February 17, 2006
                                                        Certified Current as of December 1, 2010

                                                                                       USD(P&R)

SUBJECT: Civilian Mobility Program

References: (a) DoD Directive 1400.24, subject as above, October 20, 1989
                (hereby canceled)
            (b) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
            (c) Title 10, United States Code
            (d) Joint Travel Regulations, Volume 2


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction:

   1.1. Reissues Reference (a) as an Instruction, consistent with the authority in Reference (b).

   1.2. Establishes and implements policy and assigns responsibilities and procedures for the
development and operation of formal civilian mobility programs within the Department of
Defense, pursuant to Reference (b), when such programs enhance career progressions and
improve mission effectiveness.


2. APPLICABILITY

This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Military Departments, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities and all
other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as
the “DoD Components”).
                                                               DoDI 1400.24, February 17, 2006

3. DEFINITIONS

   3.1. Civilian Mobility Agreement. An agreement signed by an employee as a condition of
employment that the employee, at the discretion of management, is subject to change of
permanent duty station under the terms of an established civilian mobility program.

   3.2. Civilian Mobility Program. A formal program that provides for planned change of
permanent duty station of civilian personnel within the same or another DoD Component that
may involve relocation without reduction in grade.

   3.3. Relocation. A change in permanent duty assignment from one location to another
requiring a relocation of the employee’s residence.


4. POLICY

It is DoD policy, pursuant to Reference (b) and title 10 (Reference (c)), that the procedures in
this Instruction (Section 6, below) be used when establishing a civilian mobility program as part
of a DoD Component’s workforce development strategy.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES

   5.1. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness shall administer the
procedures in this Instruction.

    5.2. The Heads of the DoD Components, consistent with the procedures prescribed in this
Instruction, shall:

       5.2.1. Establish civilian mobility programs.

       5.2.2. Ensure adequate provisions have been made for funding planned relocations of
personnel when formal mobility programs have been established.

       5.2.3. Ensure employee costs associated with relocations under this instruction are
reimbursed in accordance with Joint Travel Regulations (Reference (d)).


6. PROCEDURES

The following parameters shall be considered in establishing civilian mobility programs:

     6.1. When necessary to enhance career progression and/or improve mission effectiveness,
civilian mobility programs may be established by DoD Components. Such programs,
prescribing mandatory mobility of civilian employees as a condition of employment, shall be
initiated only when voluntary programs are incapable of supporting essential mobility
requirements. The establishment of civilian mobility programs recognizes that selected


                                                2
                                                                DoDI 1400.24, February 17, 2006

relocations shall be required for designated intern training, other formal developmental efforts,
specified career development enhancement, or planned efforts in support of mission-related
needs.

    6.2. Civilian mobility programs that are part of career development programs shall not
require more than 2 relocations of an employee between initial assignment and completion of the
formal training for placement at the target or full performance level in the career field. Other
civilian mobility programs, e.g., those requiring periodic rotation of employees, shall not require
relocations of covered employees more frequently than once every 2 years unless deviation is
required by contract expiration or otherwise established limitations on the duration of tours of
duty for an area. However, temporary duty assignments, i.e., for formal training or for meeting
emergency or other mission essential needs, may be required.

    6.3. Positions covered are to be clearly identified by type and level in the mobility program's
enabling document. Civilian mobility programs shall generally be confined to administrative,
professional, technical, and managerial positions.

    6.4. Current employees in newly covered positions shall be subject to mobility programs
only after voluntary execution of a mobility program agreement unless there already was a
preexisting requirement for mobility when the assignment to the position was accepted.

    6.5. On establishment of a formal mobility program, new employees assigned to covered
positions shall be clearly informed of the details and operations of the program before
assignment and shall be required to execute a mobility agreement as a condition of employment.

    6.6. Geographic preferences of covered employees for permanent duty station changes shall
be considered, but are not binding on management. When practicable, employees covered by
mobility programs shall be assigned to geographic areas of their preference.

    6.7. Employees in mobility program positions shall usually be given at least 90 days advance
notice of relocation, unless a move is required to meet essential mission requirements or other
properly approved exceptions to the established program.

   6.8. Formal mobility programs shall describe the administrative actions to be taken when an
employee fails to honor a mobility agreement, and shall contain provisions for releasing
employees from mobility requirements that, in hardship cases, may include reassignment to other
positions not requiring mobility.

    6.9. Formal mobility programs shall not prevent current employees from occupying covered
mobility program positions even though these employees have declined to sign a mobility
agreement. These employees shall not be excluded from consideration and selection for
promotion to vacancies at their present location for which qualified and available.




                                                 3
                                                             DoDI 1400.24, February 17, 2006

    6.10. The use of civilian mobility programs shall only be for enhancing career development
and progression and/or achieving mission effectiveness. Mobility assignments shall not be used
as a form of disciplinary action.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Instruction is effective immediately.




                                                   David S. C. Chu
                                                   Under Secretary of Defense
                                                   (Personnel & Readiness)




                                               4
