                               Department of Defense
                                  INSTRUCTION

                                                                               NUMBER 5000.67
                                                                                  February 1, 2010
                                                           Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018

                                                                                           USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:        Prevention and Mitigation of Corrosion on DoD Military Equipment and
                Infrastructure

References:     See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive 5134.01 (Reference (a)), this
Instruction reissues DoD Instruction 5000.67 (Reference (b)), pursuant to section 2228 of title
10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (c)), to establish policy, assign responsibilities, and
provide guidance for the establishment and management of programs to prevent or mitigate
corrosion of DoD military equipment and infrastructure.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to the OSD, the Military Departments, the Office
of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter
collectively referred to as the “DoD Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

   a. budget. With respect to a fiscal year, the budget for the fiscal year that is submitted to
Congress by the President pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31, U.S.C. (Reference (d)).

   b. corrosion. The deterioration of a material or its properties due to a reaction of that
material with its chemical environment.

   c. defense budget materials. With respect to a fiscal year, the materials submitted to
Congress by the Secretary of Defense in support of the budget for that fiscal year.

     d. infrastructure. All buildings, structures, airfields, port facilities, surface and subterranean
utility systems, heating and cooling systems, fuel tanks, pavements, and bridges.
                                                                 DoDI 5000.67, February 1, 2010


  e. military equipment. Includes all weapon systems, weapon platforms, vehicles, and
munitions of the Department of Defense and the components of such items.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that

    a. Trade-off decisions involving cost, useful service life, and effectiveness shall address
corrosion prevention and mitigation in accordance with paragraph E1.1.17. of DoD Directive
5000.01 (Reference (e)).

   b. Corrosion prevention and control (CPC) programs and preservation techniques shall be
implemented throughout the life cycle of all military equipment and infrastructure in accordance
with this Instruction.

    c. For acquisition category (ACAT) I programs, a review and evaluation of corrosion
planning shall be a topic for the Overarching Integrated Product Team (IPT), with issues raised
to the Defense Acquisition Board in accordance with USD(AT&L) guidance in the USD(AT&L)
Memorandum (Reference (f)). ACAT program criteria are contained in DoD Instruction 5000.02
(Reference (g)).

    d. Logistics and financial systems for military equipment shall be assessed for available
corrosion-related information. Conclusions and recommendations drawn from this information
shall be used to address CPC as well as related logistics and readiness issues in accordance with
paragraph 3.3.7. of DoD Directive 4151.18 (Reference (h)).

    e. During the annual internal DoD budget process, the Military Departments shall submit
information on the proposed corrosion programs and corrosion-related research, development,
test, and evaluation RDT&E funding levels to the Director, Corrosion Policy and Oversight
(D, CPO), in accordance with Reference (c).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The annual report to the Secretary of Defense
prescribed by paragraph 2.f. of Enclosure 2 has been assigned Report Control Symbol DD-
AT&L(A) 2309 in accordance with DoD Manual 8910.01(Reference (i)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This Instruction is available on the
Directives Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             2
                                                               DoDI 5000.67, February 1, 2010


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. This change reassigns the office of primary responsibility for
this Instruction to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment in accordance
with the July 13, 2018 Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (j)).


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective February 1, 2010.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities




Change 2, 08/31/2018                           3
                                                                     DoDI 5000.67, February 1, 2010



                                           ENCLOSURE 1

                                            REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and
      Logistics,” December 9, 2005, as amended
(b)   DoD Instruction 5000.67, “Prevention and Mitigation of Corrosion on DoD Military
      Equipment Infrastructure,” January 25, 2008 (hereby canceled)
(c)   Section 2228 of title 10, United States Code
(d)   Section 1105a of title 31, United States Code
(e)   DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003
(f)   Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Memorandum,
      “Corrosion Prevention and Control,” November 12, 2003 1
(g)   DoD Instruction 5000.02, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,”
      January 7, 2015, as amended
(h)   DoD Directive 4151.18, “Maintenance of Military Materiel,” March 31, 2004
(i)   DoD Manual 8910.01, “DoD Information Collections Manual,” date varies by volume
(j)   Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
      Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
      of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(k)   DoD Corrosion Policy and Oversight Office, “DoD Corrosion Prevention and Mitigation
      Strategic Plan,” December 2009 2
(l)   DoD Directive 3020.40 “Mission Assurance (MA),” November 29, 2016
(m)   Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Installations and Environment Memorandum,
      “Facility Corrosion Prevention and Control,” March 10, 2005




1
 Available at: www.corrdefense.org (Resources, CPC Policy Memorandum)
2
 Available at: www.corrdefense.org (DoD CPC IPT Documents, DoD Corrosion Prevention and Mitigation
Strategic Plan)


Change 2, 08/31/2018                                4                                  ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDI 5000.67, February 1, 2010



                                        ENCLOSURE 2

                                     RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L) shall:

    a. Be responsible to the Secretary of Defense for the prevention and mitigation of corrosion
of the military equipment and infrastructure of the Department of Defense.

  b. Establish an Office of Corrosion Policy and Oversight within the Office of the
USD(AT&L).

   c. Select and assign a civilian employee of the Department of Defense to the position of
D, CPO. The Director shall report directly to the USD(AT&L).

    d. Submit an annual report to Congress providing the funding requirements for the long-term
strategy to reduce corrosion and the effects of corrosion on military equipment and
infrastructure.


2. D, CPO. The D, CPO, under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), shall:

    a. Develop and recommend policy and guidance on the prevention and mitigation of
corrosion.

   b. Review corrosion programs and corrosion-related research, development, test, and
evaluation (RDT&E) funding levels of the Military Departments as well as the Defense Agencies
under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L).

   c. Monitor and coordinate DoD efforts to prevent or mitigate corrosion during the
acquisition and sustainment cycles of military equipment and infrastructure.

   d. Monitor acquisition practices to ensure:

       (1) That the use of corrosion prevention technologies and the application of corrosion
prevention treatments are fully considered during research and development in the acquisition
process.

       (2) To the extent determined appropriate for each acquisition program, that such
technologies and treatments are incorporated into that program, particularly during the
engineering and design phases of the acquisition process.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                             5                               ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDI 5000.67, February 1, 2010


    e. Develop a long-term strategy to reduce corrosion and the effects of corrosion on military
equipment and infrastructure in accordance with the DoD Corrosion Prevention and Mitigation
Strategic Plan (Reference (k)).

    f. Annually report recommendations to the Secretary of Defense, through the USD(AT&L),
pertaining to the Military Departments’ corrosion prevention and mitigation programs and
corrosion-related RDT&E funding levels as required by Reference (c).

  g. Prepare and provide to USD(AT&L) the report required by Reference (c) for
USD(AT&L)’s submission to Congress, which shall include the following:

        (1) Funding requirements for the long-term strategy to reduce corrosion and the effects
of corrosion on military equipment and infrastructure contained in Reference (k).

       (2) The return on investment that would be achieved by implementing the strategy.

       (3) The funds requested in the budget compared to the funding requirements.

       (4) An explanation if the funding requirements are not fully funded in the budget.

    h. Monitor and coordinate the efforts within the Department of Defense to prevent or
mitigate corrosion during:

       (1) The design, acquisition, and maintenance of military equipment.

       (2) The design, construction, and maintenance of military infrastructure.

   i. Head the CPC IPT.

    j. Develop an overarching, long-term corrosion prevention and mitigation strategy. The
strategy shall be reviewed at least annually and, in accordance with paragraph (d)(2) of
Reference (c), provide for:

      (1) Expansion of the emphasis on corrosion prevention and mitigation within the
Department of Defense for military equipment and infrastructure.

        (2) Uniform application throughout the Department of Defense of an evaluation process
that accounts for common and Military Department-unique requirements and criteria for the
testing and certification of new corrosion-prevention materials and processing technologies for
equipment and infrastructure with similar characteristics, missions, or operating environments.

        (3) Implementation of programs – including archival of supporting information packages
and databases – to ensure a focused and coordinated approach throughout the Department of
Defense to collect, review, validate, and distribute information on proven methods and products
for corrosion prevention of military equipment and infrastructure.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            6                                  ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                  DoDI 5000.67, February 1, 2010


        (4) Establishment of a coordinated research and development program for the prevention
and mitigation of corrosion for new and existing military equipment and infrastructure. Include
a plan to transition new corrosion prevention technologies into operational systems.

   k. Develop a set of performance measures and milestones to manage the Department’s
program and quantify results as required in Reference (k).

    l. Accomplish cost of corrosion baseline and materiel availability studies with recurring
assessments provided to the Military Departments as well as the Defense Agencies under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L).

    m. Develop and maintain a DoD-wide product introduction process to accelerate the
identification, testing, qualification, and insertion of corrosion prevention and mitigation
products in the Department.

   n. Assess corrosion-related initiatives emanating from the Defense Critical Infrastructure
Program as established in DoD Directive 3020.40 (Reference (l)).


3. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF EACH MILITARY DEPARTMENT. The Assistant
Secretary of each Military Department with responsibility for acquisition, technology, and
logistics, under the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of the Military Department,
shall:

   a. Oversee and coordinate efforts throughout their respective Military Department to prevent
and mitigate corrosion of military equipment and infrastructure.

    b. Designate an employee of their respective Military Department as the Corrosion Control
and Prevention Executive (CCPE). The CCPE will be the senior official within each Department
with responsibility for coordinating Department-level corrosion control and prevention activities
(including budget programming) with the Military Department and the OSD, the program
executive officers of the Military Departments, and relevant major subordinate commands of the
Military Departments as required by Reference (c).

       (1) The CCPE shall ensure that corrosion control and prevention is contained in the
Department’s policy and guidance for management, to include identifying the funding levels
necessary to accomplish:

           (a) System acquisition and production, including design and maintenance.

           (b) RDT&E programs and activities.

          (c) Equipment standardization programs, including international standardization
agreements.

           (d) Logistics research and development initiatives.



Change 2, 08/31/2018                             7                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                   DoDI 5000.67, February 1, 2010



           (e) Logistics support analysis as it relates to integrated logistics support in the
materiel acquisition process.

           (f) Military infrastructure design, construction, and maintenance.

       (2) The CCPE shall, in cooperation with the appropriate staff of the Military Department,
develop, support, and provide the rationale for resources to:

         (a) Initiate and sustain an effective corrosion control and prevention program in the
Department.

           (b) Evaluate the program’s effectiveness.

            (c) Ensure that corrosion control and prevention requirements for materiel are
reflected in budgeting and policies of the Department for the formulation, management, and
evaluation of personnel and programs for the entire Department, including the Reserve
Components.

        (3) The CCPE shall be the principal point of contact for the Department to the D, CPO
(as assigned under Reference (c)).

       (4) The CCPE shall submit an annual report, not later than December 31, to the D, CPO
containing recommendations pertaining to the corrosion prevention and control of their Military
Department, including corrosion-related funding levels.

     (5) The CCPE shall, with coordination through the proper Military Department chain of
command:

           (a) Provide to the D, CPO, information on:

                1. Proposed corrosion programs and corrosion-related RDT&E funding levels as
described in paragraph 2.f. of this enclosure and in accordance with Reference (c). This includes
establishing responsibilities and methods for collecting and submitting the data.

               2. Corrosion project opportunities to support the Director’s responsibilities in
paragraph 2.g. of this enclosure as required by Reference (c).

            (b) Establish a process to review and evaluate the adequacy of corrosion planning,
and require program and project managers consider and implement corrosion prevention and
mitigation planning to minimize the impact of corrosion throughout the system and infrastructure
life cycle.

           (c) For military equipment:




Change 2, 08/31/2018                              8                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDI 5000.67, February 1, 2010


             1. Develop procedures for corrosion planning, process implementation,
management, review, and documentation of results.

               2. Exploit logistics and financial systems for available corrosion-related
information.

               3. Establish a process to review and evaluate corrosion for all development,
acquisition, and sustainment contracts requiring an acquisition plan.

           (d) For infrastructure:

                1. For all sustainment, restoration, modernization, or new construction programs
or projects, regardless of appropriation, establish a process to review and evaluate corrosion
planning in accordance with Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Installations and
Environment guidance (Reference (m)).

               2. Establish and maintain a process to collect information on the results, to
include costs and estimated cost avoidance, of corrosion prevention and mitigation activities.
This information will be available for use within each Military Department to monitor the
effectiveness of each Department’s respective corrosion prevention and mitigation program.

                3. Assess corrosion-related initiatives emanating from the Defense Critical
Infrastructure Program.

           (e) Support the CPC IPT process by:

               1. Designating trained or qualified representatives to the CPC IPT.

              2. Submitting candidate military equipment and infrastructure corrosion
prevention and mitigation projects during the annual project data call.

                3. Reviewing the results and assessments from the cost of corrosion and materiel
availability baseline studies to support corrosion prevention and mitigation activities.

               4. Assisting the development of a DoD-wide corrosion-related product
introduction process and implementing the process in the Military Department.




Change 2, 08/31/2018                            9                                 ENCLOSURE 2
