                               Department of Defense
                                 INSTRUCTION

                                                                              NUMBER 3325.08
                                                                             September 17, 2012
                                               Incorporating Change 3, Effective August 26, 2020

                                                                                        USD(I&S)

SUBJECT:      DoD Intelligence Collection Management

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This Instruction:

    a. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities for intelligence collection management
(CM) in the DoD in accordance with the authorities in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01, DoDD
5105.21, DoDD 5240.01, and Intelligence Community Directive Number 300 (References (a)
through (d)).

    b. Establishes the Defense CM Board (DCMB) (Enclosure 2) in accordance with DoD
Instruction (DoDI) 5105.18 (Reference (e)) to assist the Defense Collection Manager (DCM) to
provide overarching DoD CM guidance and evaluate performance and effectiveness of DoD CM
activities in satisfying intelligence needs.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Instruction applies to OSD, the Military Departments (including the
Coast Guard at all times, including when it is a Service in the Department of Homeland Security by
agreement with that Department), the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS)
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands (CCMDs), the Office of the Inspector General of
the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to collectively as the “DoD
Components”).


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

   a. DoD CM activities shall be:
                                                              DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


       (1) Conducted pursuant to the authorities and restrictions of the U.S. Constitution,
applicable law, and DoD policies and in accordance with the procedures set forth in Executive
Order 12333 and DoD 5240.1-R (References (f) and (g)).

        (2) Executed in a coordinated, coherent, and decentralized manner to maximize
efficiency and effectiveness of an integrated Defense CM Enterprise (DCME).

     (3) Responsive to the intelligence information needs of national and DoD policymakers,
commanders, planners, acquisition officials, and intelligence analysts.

   b. DoD collection managers shall:

       (1) Measure the effectiveness of their CM strategies and the satisfaction of collection
requirements across all disciplines.

       (2) Be certified in and adhere to core common CM standards.

  c. CM capabilities and tools shall be compatible and consistent with DoD and Intelligence
Community (IC) data standards, architectures, processes, and procedures.

    d. Special Access Programs and other sensitive activities will be integrated into the CM
process whenever possible to effectively support policy formulation, strategic decision making,
planning, and operational execution.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 3.


6. RELEASABILITY. This instruction is available on the Directives Division Website at
https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This administrative change updates the title of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence to the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and
Security in accordance with Public Law 116-92 (Reference (h)).




Change 3, 08/26/2020                            2
                                                        DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Instruction is effective September 17, 2012.




Enclosures
   1. References
   2. DCMB
   3. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 3, 08/26/2020                        3
                                                                         DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


                                                ENCLOSURE 1

                                                REFERENCES


(a)   DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
      (USD(I&S)),” October 24, 2014, as amended
(b)   DoD Directive 5105.21, “Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA),” March 18, 2008
(c)   DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007, as amended
(d)   Intelligence Community Directive Number 300, “Management, Integration, and Oversight
      of Intelligence Collection and Covert Action,” October 3, 2006
(e)   DoD Instruction 5105.18, “DoD Intergovernmental and Intragovernmental Committee
      Management Program,” July 10, 2009, as amended
(f)   Executive Order 12333, United States Intelligence Activities,” as amended
(g)   DoD 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components
      That Affect United States Persons,” December 1982, as amended
(h)   Public Law 116-92, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020,” December
      20, 2019
(i)   DoD Instruction 3115.11, “DoD Intelligence Human Capital Management Operations,”
      January 22, 2009, as amended
(j)   Director of National Intelligence, “The National Intelligence Strategy of the United States
      of America,” current edition
(k)   DoD Instruction 5240.18, “Counterintelligence (CI) Analysis and Production,”
      November 17, 2009, as amended
(l)   DoD Directive S-5200.37, “Management and Execution of Defense Human Intelligence
      (HUMINT) (U),” February 9, 2009, as amended 1
(m)   DoD Instruction 5105.58, “Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT),”
      April 22, 2009, as amended
(n)   DoD Instruction S-5240.17, “Counterintelligence Collection Activities (U),” March 14,
      2014
(o)   Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “DoD Dictionary of Military and
      Associated Terms,” current edition




1
 This is a controlled document and is available through the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence and Security.


Change 3, 08/26/2020                                     4                             ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


                                            ENCLOSURE 2

                                                DCMB


1. PURPOSE. The DCMB shall:

       a. Be the primary forum for coordinating activities and resolving issues related to DoD CM.

    b. Assist the DCM in managing the DoD collection requirements process, including
coordination among the major collection disciplines within the DCME. To this end, the DCMB
shall:

          (1) Determine:

              (a) Priorities for collaborative CM strategies.

              (b) DoD collection assessment focus areas.

              (c) DoD collection priorities and inform other processes that affect capabilities and
readiness.

       (2) Provide a forum for determining DoD collections support for national intelligence
and coordinating multinational collections.


2. MANAGEMENT AND MEMBERSHIP

   a. The DoD Functional Manager for Collection Management (FM/CM), designated by the
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), shall chair the DCMB.

   b. The membership of the DCMB shall be limited to full-time or permanent part-time
Government employees or members and shall consist of:

          (1) General or flag officers (G/FOs) or equivalent civilian representatives provided by
the:

              (a) Deputy Director of National Intelligence – Intelligence Integration.

              (b) Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security (USD(I&S)).

              (c) Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)).

              (d) CJCS.

              (e) DIA.



Change 3, 08/26/2020                                5                        ENCLOSURE 2
                                                             DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012



            (f) National Security Agency (NSA)/Central Security Service (CSS).

            (g) National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).

            (h) National Reconnaissance Office (NRO).

            (i) CCMDs.

            (j) Military Services.

            (k) Assistant Commandant for Intelligence and Criminal Investigations, U.S. Coast
Guard.

        (2) With approval of the USD(I&S), the requirement for G/FO or equivalent civilian
representation may be waived. The requirement for representation by full-time or permanent
part-time Government employees or members shall not be waived.

    c. After prior coordination with the DCMB Chair to verify security, disclosure, and release
issues are addressed, members may invite guest attendees from organizations associated with
DoD CM, which may include:

         (1) IC members.

         (2) Federal agencies.

         (3) Tribal, State, or local governments.

         (4) Foreign governments.

    d. The DoD FM/CM shall provide for Executive Secretariat support for the DCMB, to
include identifying locations, preparing and publishing minutes, announcing agenda, and
providing for web support. This support may be provided by any member organization of the
DCMB, but will be coordinated by the DoD FM/CM.

   e. The membership of the DCMB shall be supported by Defense CM Working Groups
(DCMWGs) to address issues as determined by the DCMB. These shall consist of a standing
DCMWG and specialized working groups established according to Reference (e) to address
specific issues.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                                6                    ENCLOSURE 2
                                                               DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012



                                         ENCLOSURE 3

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. USD(I&S). The USD(I&S), in accordance with Reference (a), shall:

    a. Oversee DoD CM plans, policies, and programs, including training, certification, and
professional development programs in accordance with DoDI 3115.11 (Reference (i)).

    b. Provide direction and guidance to DoD Components conducting CM activities, including
resolution of issues raised by the DCMB for USD(I&S) decision.

   c. Maintain Defense CM capabilities and ensure DCME sustainability.

   d. Provide representation to the DCMB.


2. DIRECTOR, DIA. The Director, DIA, or his or her designated representative, in accordance
with Reference (b), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), shall:

   a. As DCM:

       (1) Integrate, coordinate, and synchronize Defense CM.

       (2) Serve as the Defense CM Authority.

       (3) Appoint a DoD FM/CM to:

            (a) Monitor and assess the DCME and recommend changes to DoD policy and
doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, and facilities
(DOTMLPF), as appropriate, to improve standardization and operational effectiveness of the
DCME.

        (b) Set standards for training, certification, and professional development for the
DoD CM mission category workforce.

            (c) Advocate for resources required for DoD intelligence collection.

            (d) Determine functional requirements for CM-related compartmented special
programs.

      (4) Promote coordination, cooperation, information sharing, and cross-service
management of CM within the DoD and the IC to support implementation of USD(I&S)




Change 3, 08/26/2020                             7                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                                DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


responsibilities in accordance with the authorities and restrictions of the U.S. Constitution,
applicable law, and DoD policies, including Reference (c).

      (5) Assess the readiness of the DCME on a recurring basis and advocate for materiel and
non-materiel requirements to the Joint Staff through the Joint Capabilities Integration
Development Process System to address DCME capability gaps and shortfalls.

       (6) Develop and execute the Defense CM Program (DCMP). Advocate CM
programmatic requirements to the USD(I&S) through the planning, programming, budgeting,
and execution process.

        (7) Issue CM operating procedures and standards, consistent with national and DoD
policies and strategic guidance, including the National Intelligence Strategy (Reference (j)), to
enhance DCME effectiveness.

        (8) Manage and lead the development of CM as a mission category and an intelligence
occupation, and develop joint CM training, education, and certification standards. Manage
collection assessment as a sub-discipline of the CM occupation.

       (9) Chair the DCMB, as described in Enclosure 2.

       (10) Establish a standing DCMWG for identification, discussion, and resolution of DoD-
wide collection management enterprise issues, with results reported to the DCMB. The standing
CMWG will be comprised of members from across the DCME.

        (11) Set priorities for DoD collection requirements, consistent with national and DoD
strategic intelligence priorities, including appropriately reflecting the operational and planning
priorities of the CCMDs, Military Services, and Defense Agencies.

        (12) Coordinate DoD FM/CM activities with the DoD Functional Manager for Analysis
to integrate all-source intelligence analysis and CM processes.

       (13) Coordinate DoD FM/CM activities with the DoD Counterintelligence (CI)
Production Manager to ensure that CI analysis and CM processes are fully integrated in
accordance with DoDI 5240.18 (Reference (k)).

        (14) Establish DCME configuration oversight procedures and resource guidelines for
collection requirements and collection operations architectural integration to enable streamlined
and integrated intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) and national technical means
CM.

       (15) Establish DCME data standards and oversight for DoD CM and ISR support tools;
coordinate standards with responsible national-level and Defense Intelligence Component
functional managers.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                             8                          ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


       (16) Validate, recommend prioritization for national collection systems, and ensure that
Defense intelligence requirements are registered in the appropriate collection management
system and tasked for collection.

        (17) In coordination with all DCME organizations, develop and implement all-source
intelligence collection strategies in support of priority IC or DoD-wide intelligence information
needs, often spanning two or more CCMDs. Assist CCMDs to integrate all-source intelligence
collection strategies into collection plans.

       (18) Assess collected information against stated needs and recommend adjustments to
plans, missions, and other actions to improve collection results.

        (19) Coordinate collection responsibility and monitor the application of DoD intelligence
collection resources to requirements.

   b. As Defense Human Intelligence (HUMINT) Manager, in accordance with DoDD S-
5200.37 (Reference (l)), coordinate DoD HUMINT CM functional management matters with the
DoD FM/CM in order to integrate HUMINT into the all-source intelligence CM and other
mission management processes.

    c. As the Defense Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT) Manager, in
accordance with DoDI 5105.58 (Reference (m)), coordinate DoD MASINT CM functional
management matters with the DoD FM/CM in order to integrate MASINT into the all-source
intelligence CM and other mission management processes.

    d. As the Defense CI Collection Manager, in accordance with DoDI S-5240.17 (Reference
(n)):

       (1) Coordinate DoD-related CI collection requirements management (CRM) activities
with the DoD FM/CM.

    (2) Fully integrate CI collection requirements into collection strategies managed by the
CCMDs and the DCM.

       (3) Maintain consistency with CM priorities.


3. DIRECTOR, NGA. The Director, NGA, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I&S), shall:

   a. Advise the DCM on geospatial intelligence (GEOINT) CM policy and procedures.

    b. Coordinate DoD-related GEOINT CRM activities with the DCM and ensure consistency
of priorities.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                            9                         ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


    c. Coordinate DoD-related GEOINT CM resource needs, strategy, and budget with the DCM
to ensure an integrated, multi-discipline approach to advocating for DCME needs and priorities.

   d. Provide input, as requested, to DCMP reviews.

    e. Coordinate with the DCM on GEOINT collection requirements, collection operations
architectural integration, and data standards to ensure DoD collection systems interoperability.

   f. Assign a CM senior representative to the DCMB.

   g. Support the DCMWG and specialized working groups as determined by the DCMB.


4. DIRECTOR, NSA/CHIEF, CSS (DIRNSA/CHCSS). The DIRNSA/CHCSS, under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(I&S), shall:

   a. Advise the DCM on signals intelligence (SIGINT) CM policy and procedures.

   b. Advise the DCM of DoD-related SIGINT CRM activities.

    c. Coordinate DoD-related SIGINT CM resource needs, strategy, and budget with the DCM
to ensure an integrated, multi-discipline approach to advocating for DCME needs and priorities.

   d. Provide input, as requested, to DCMP reviews.

    e. Advise the DCM on SIGINT collection requirements, collection operations architectural
integration, and data standards to ensure DoD collection systems interoperability and
configuration management.

   f. Assign a CM senior representative to the DCMB.

   g. Support the DCMWG and specialized working groups as determined by the DCMB.


5. DIRECTOR, NRO. The Director, NRO, under the authority, direction, and control of the
USD(I&S), shall:

   a. Advise the DCM on the status and integration of the national systems and architecture.

  b. Ensure that recommendations for national systems and architecture are consistent with
DCM priorities.

    c. Coordinate DoD-related collection resource needs and budget with the DCM to ensure an
integrated, multi-discipline approach for advocating for next generation national systems
intelligence capabilities to support DCME needs and priorities.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                            10                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                              DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


   d. Provide input, as required, to DCMP reviews.

   e. Assign a senior representative to the DCMB.

   f. Support the DCMWG and specialized working groups as determined by the DCMB.


6. USD(P). The USD(P) shall:

   a. Assign a senior representative to the DCMB.

   b. Support the DCMWG and specialized working groups as determined by the DCMB.

   c. Provide input on mission needs, collection priorities and requirements, and force
management issues.

   d. Advise the USD(I&S) on DoD CM strategic, operational, and planning priorities.


7. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. The Secretaries of the Military
Departments shall:

   a. Identify Service-specific intelligence priorities and advise the DCM on projected national
security trends affecting the Services.

   b. Coordinate Service-related CM resource needs, strategy, and budget with the DCM for
purposes of overall advocacy of DoD CM needs and priorities.

   c. Coordinate with the DCM on Service collection requirements, data standards, and
operations architectural integration to ensure DoD collection systems interoperability and
configuration management.

   d. Provide input to the DCMP reviews.

    e. Identify personnel requirements for collection managers in support of Service intelligence
and operations missions, and develop and implement procedures and guidance to comply with
direction and guidance for training standardization and certification programs.

   f. Assign a senior representative to the DCMB. The Navy shall designate both a Navy and
Marine Corps representative.

   g. Support the DCMWG and specialized working groups as determined by the DCMB.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                           11                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                               DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


8. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall:

   a. Advise the DCM on DoD intelligence collection requirements and resources.

    b. Ensure collection requirements appropriately reflect the operational and planning
priorities of the CCMDs, Services, and Defense Agencies.

   c. Advise the DCM on joint doctrine, architecture, and the Joint Requirements Oversight
Council process.

   d. Identify and prioritize CCMD CM architecture needs and requirements to the DCM.

   e. Provide feedback on the effectiveness of CM support to joint forces to the DCM.

   f. Provide input, as requested, to DCMP reviews.

   g. Assign a senior representative to the DCMB.

   h. Support the DCMWG and specialized working groups as determined by the DCMB.

    i. Serve as the lead for CM lessons learned at the joint task force, strategic-theater and
strategic-national levels of operations, and gather, analyze, and vet best practices to develop
recommendations to change DOTMLPF, as appropriate, on behalf of the DCME and in close
coordination with the DoD FM/CM.

   j. Assist in the development of CM training and readiness standards and develop and
maintain CM Universal Joint Intelligence Task Lists.

   k. Plan and conduct DCME readiness assessments in coordination with the DoD FM/CM.

   l. Integrate ISR concepts of operation and doctrine which are relevant to CM into DCME
concepts of operation in support of the DCM.


9. COMMANDERS OF THE CCMDS. The Commanders of the CCMDs shall:

    a. Provide collection plans to the DCM to expedite CRM validation and ensure consistency
of priorities and synchronization of Defense CM.

    b. Provide priority intelligence requirements (PIRs) and advise the DCM on near-term
national security implications and trends impacting each of their respective Commands.

    c. Coordinate CCMD CM resource needs, strategy, and budget with the DCM in support of
the DCMP development process.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                            12                        ENCLOSURE 3
                                                            DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


   d. Coordinate CCMD collection requirements, collection operations architectural integration,
and applicable data standards with the DCM to ensure DoD collection systems are interoperable
and subject to common DCME configuration management policies, procedures, and standards.

   e. Assign a senior representative to the DCMB.

   f. Support the DCMWG and specialized working groups as determined by the DCMB.

   g. Provide input, as requested, to DCMP reviews.

    h. Identify personnel requirements for collection managers in support of CCMDs
intelligence and operations missions.

    i. Develop and implement procedures and guidance to comply with direction and guidance
for training standardization and certification program.


10. ASSISTANT COMMANDANT FOR INTELLIGENCE AND CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS, U.S. COAST GUARD. The Assistant Commandant for Intelligence and
Criminal Investigations, U.S. Coast Guard shall:

   a. Provide input, as requested, to DCMP reviews.

   b. Assign a representative to the DCMB.

   c. Support the DCMGWG and specialized working groups as determined by the DCMB.




Change 3, 08/26/2020                          13                       ENCLOSURE 3
                                                            DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


                                        GLOSSARY

                       PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


CI                 counterintelligence
CM                 collection management
CCMD               Combatant Command
CJCS               Chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
CRM                collection requirements management
CSS                Central Security Service

DCM                Defense Collection Manager
DCMB               Defense CM Board
DCME               Defense CM Enterprise
DCMP               Defense CM Program
DCMWG              Defense CM Working Group
DIA                Defense Intelligence Agency
DIRNSA/CHCSS       Director, NSA/Chief, CSS
DoDD               DoD directive
DoDI               DoD instruction
DOTMLPF            doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel,
                   and facilities

FM/CM              Functional Manager for Collection Management

GEOINT             geospatial intelligence

HUMINT             human intelligence

IC                 Intelligence Community
ISR                intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance

MASINT             measurement and signature intelligence

NGA                National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
NRO                National Reconnaissance Office
NSA                National Security Agency

PIR                priority intelligence requirement



Change 3, 08/26/2020                         14                            GLOSSARY
                                                                  DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


 SIGINT                signals intelligence

 USD(I&S)              Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
 USD(P)                Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


                                      PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Instruction.

all-source intelligence. Defined in the DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms
(Reference (o)).

CM. Defined in Reference (o).

CM strategy. The method used by a collection manager, based on established CM standards,
available collection capabilities, and collection target characteristics, to establish, prioritize, and
submit collection requirements in a deliberate, focused, integrated, and synchronized manner
across multiple intelligence disciplines. The goals of a CM strategy are to identify, allocate, and
apply national, theater and tactical ISR resources and capabilities; to task these resources, to
submit requirements, to collect in a way that effectively and efficiently answers the customer's
PIRs; support analytic intelligence information shortfalls and gaps; and to support the
development of effective and responsive collection plans to support the adaptive planning
process.

collection. Defined in Reference (o).

collection manager. Defined in Reference (o).

CRM. Defined in Reference (o).

DCME. DoD organizations responsible for CM: the CCMDs, Defense intelligence combat
support agencies, Military Services, intelligence-related DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within DoD conducting intelligence collection and other non-DoD entities
that are conducting Defense intelligence collection under the Secretary of Defense’s authority.

DCMP. A comprehensive Defense CM program for assuring the performance of the DCME
against national and DoD collection requirements and standards and for providing associated
National Intelligence Program and Military Intelligence Program resources.

Defense CM Authority. The DoD official designated to set priorities for DoD collection
requirements consistent with national and DoD strategic intelligence priorities.

Defense Intelligence. Defined in Reference (a).



Change 3, 08/26/2020                              15                             GLOSSARY
                                                           DoDI 3325.08, September 17, 2012


DoD FM/CM. The DoD FM/CM develops, manages, and executes the DCM’s strategy, policy,
professional development, technology and architectures, and resource requirements to enhance
the performance of Defense intelligence collection.

DOTMLPF. Defined in Reference (o).




Change 3, 08/26/2020                         16                          GLOSSARY
