                                                                          DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992


                             Department of Defense
                           INSTRUCTION

                                                                        NUMBER 5210.84
                                                                        January 22, 1992,


                     Administrative Reissuance Incorporating Change 1, October 15, 1996
                                                                                ASD(C3I)

 SUBJECT: Security of DoD Personnel at U.S. Missions Abroad

 References: (a) Public Law 99-399, "Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism
                  Act of 1986"
             (b) DoD Instruction 5105.57, "Procedures for the U.S. Defense
                  Representative (USDR) in Foreign Countries," December
                  26,1995
             (c) DoD 7750.5-M, "DoD Procedures for Management of
                  Information Requirements," November 1986


1. PURPOSE

This Instruction:

       1.1. Disseminates the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the
Department of Defense and the Department of State on diplomatic security at United
States missions abroad (enclosure E1.), and the Attorney General memorandum for the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) supervision and conduct of espionage
investigations of all U.S. personnel assigned to these missions (enclosure E2.).

       1.2. Designates the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), as the DoD
Executive Agent for diplomatic security matters addressed in this Instruction for all
noncombatant DoD elements operating under the authority of the Chief of Mission
(examples include, but are not limited to, Defense Attache' Offices and Security
Assistance Organizations).



                                            1
                                                                             DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




2. APPLICABILITY

       2.1. This Instruction applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the


Military Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the
Unified and Specified Commands, the Inspector General of the Department of Defense,
the Defense Agencies, and the DoD Field Activities (hereafter referred to collectively as
"the DoD Components").

       2.2. Reference (a) is the statutory basis for the authority of the Secretary of State
to provide for the security of U.S. Government personnel on official duty abroad (other
than those personnel under the command of the U.S. area military commander) and their
accompanying dependents.


3. POLICY

In accordance with reference (a), it is DoD policy to cooperate, to the maximum extent
possible, with the Secretary of State on the security of U.S. missions abroad, and with the
Attorney General on espionage investigations of U.S. personnel at U.S. missions to
ensure an effective diplomatic security, counterintelligence, and antiterrorism program.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

       4.1. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications,
and Intelligence shall have the primary responsibility for counterintelligence and security
countermeasures described in this Instruction.

        4.2. The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency as the DoD Executive Agent for
diplomatic security matters addressed in the agreement shall monitor the compliance with
this Instruction by DoD personnel.

        4.3. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall coordinate implementation of
this Instruction as it applies to the combatant commanders and coordinate with the OSD,
the DIA, and other DoD Components, as appropriate.




                                              2
                                                                           DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




      4.4. The United States Defense Representative shall:

             4.4.1. In accordance with reference (b), implement this Instruction in his or
her respective geographic areas of responsibilities.

              4.4.2. Coordinate with the Director, DIA on issues addressed in the
Memorandum of Understanding and notify, through established channels, the DoD
Executive Agent of any deficiencies in the security support received by DoD elements
under his or her responsibility. A copy of the communique' outlining the issue or
problem shall be sent by the USDR to OASD(SO/LIC) and Principal Director,
Information Warfare, Security, and Counterintelligence, OASD(C31).

      4.5. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

             4.5.1. Implement this Instruction in their Components.

            4.5.2. Coordinate with the USDR regarding issues addressed in the
agreement and guidelines.


5. PROCEDURES

        5.1. The U.S. Defense Representative (USDR) is the in-country representative of
the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Commander
of the Unified Command for coordination of security matters for all in-country
noncombat DoD elements (i.e., those DoD personnel and organizations not assigned to,
or attached to, and under the command of a combatant commander). The USDR shall act
as the DoD's single point of contact for security issues relating to the MOU (enclosure
El.).

       5.2. Enclosure E2. describes FBI investigative responsibility for violation of
espionage laws by U.S. persons abroad. This requires all Agencies and Departments to
immediately report to the FBI information or allegations of U.S. persons in violation of
espionage laws and allows each Agency or Department to use internal procedures for
opening investigations to determine when reporting is required.       The DIA, as the
DoD Executive Agent, will immediately notify the appropriate DoD Component, or
Component investigative agency, upon receipt of information covered under the
guidelines for appropriate action.



                                            3
                                                                           DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




6. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS

The reporting requirement listed in Section 5.2. of this Instruction is exempt from
licensing in accordance with paragraph E.4.g. of DoD 7750.5-M, "Procedures for
Management of Information Requirements.


7. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1

The changes to this issuance are administrative and update organizational titles and
references for accuracy.


8. EFFECTIVE DATE AND IMPLEMENTATION

This Instruction is effective immediately. Forward one copy of implementing documents
to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications, and
Intelligence within 120 days; forward one copy of changes to implementing documents
within 60 days of their publication.




Enclosures - 2
   1. Memorandum of Understanding Between the Department of State and the
      Department of Defense on Overseas Security Support
   2. Attorney General Guidelines for FBI Supervision or Conduct of Espionage
      Investigations of U.S. Diplomatic Missions Personnel Abroad




                                             4
                                                                            DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




                                   E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                       MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
                                  BETWEEN
                          THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE
                                  AND THE
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                                     ON
                         OVERSEAS SECURITY SUPPORT



The Departments of State and Defense agree to the following provisions regarding
overseas security services and procedures, in accordance with the Omnibus Diplomatic
Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986 (P.L. 99-399).


I. AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE

The Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986, hereafter referred to as
the Omnibus Act, requires the Secretary of State, in consultation with the heads of other
Federal Agencies having personnel or missions abroad, where appropriate and within the
scope of resources made available, to develop and implement policies and programs,
including funding levels and standards, to provide for the security of United States
Government operations of a diplomatic nature. Such policies and programs shall include:

        (1) Protection of all United States Government personnel on official duty abroad
(other than those personnel under the command of a United States area military
commander) and their accompanying dependents, and,

       (2) Establishment and operation of security functions at all United States
Government missions abroad, other than facilities or installations subject to the control of
a United States area military commander.

In order to facilitate the fulfillment of these requirements, the Omnibus Act requires other
Federal Agencies to cooperate, to the maximum extent possible, with the Secretary of
State through the development of interagency agreements on overseas security.        Such
Agencies may perform security inspections; provide logistical support relating to their
differing missions and facilities; and perform other overseas security functions as may be
authorized by the Secretary.

                                                5                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                              DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




II. TERMS OF REFERENCE: (Alphabetical Order)

      Assistant Secretary of State for Diplomatic Security (DS): The office in the
Department of State responsible for matters relating to diplomatic security and
counterterrorism at U.S. missions abroad.

        Combatant Commander: A commander-in-chief of one of the Unified or
Specified Commands established by the President. For purposes of this MOU, it is the
combatant commander-in-chief with geographical area of responsibility (EUCOM,
PACOM, LANTCOM, CENTCOM, and SOUTHCOM). The combatant commanders'
duties include security responsibilities for military personnel (and dependents)
performing strictly military functions, not otherwise assigned to the Chief-of-Mission.

       Consult; Consultation: Refers to the requirement to notify all concerned parties of
specific matters of mutual interest prior to taking action on such matters.

        Coordinate; Coordination: Refers to the requirement to notify all concerned
parties of specific matters of mutual interest and solicit their agreement prior to taking
action.

        Controlled Access Areas (CAA): Controlled access areas are specifically
designated areas within a building where classified information may be handled, stored,
discussed, or processed. There are two types of controlled access areas: core and
restricted. Core areas are those areas of the building requiring the highest levels of
protection where intelligence, cryptographic, security and other particularly sensitive or
compartmentalized information may be handled, stored, discussed, or processed.
Restricted areas are those areas of the building in which classified information may be
handled and stored. Classified discussions are permitted but may be limited to designated
areas, depending on the technical security threat.

       Defense Components/Defense Component Headquarters: Those DoD
organizations which have activities located overseas that fall under the control of the
Chief of Mission. Examples include: the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) and
Defense Security Assistance Agency (DSAA).

       Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Security Police (DUSD(SP)): The policy
officer of the Department of Defense responsible for matters relating to security and
counterintelligence.




                                                 6                                        ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                            DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




       Diplomatic Security Service (DSS), Department of State: The offices of the
Department of State responsible for the development, coordination and implementation
of security policies and programs domestically and at U.S. missions abroad.

      DoD Executive Agent: The Directorate for Security and Counterintelligence,
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA/OSC), has been designated as the office of primary
responsibility for DoD, for matters covered by this MOU.

       Emergency Action Committee (EAC): An organization established at a Foreign
Service post by the Chief of Mission or principal officer, for the purpose of planning and
coordinating the post's response to contingencies.

       Foreign Service National (FSN): Foreign Service National (FSN) employees are
foreign nationals who provide clerical, administrative, technical, fiscal and other support
at Foreign Service posts abroad. FSN means an employee of any foreign service-related
mission/program/activity of any U.S. Government Department or Agency overseas
establishment including, but not limited to, State, AID, USIA, Commerce, Agriculture,
Peace Corps, Department of Defense, (exclusive of consular agents) who is not a citizen
of the United States. The term includes Third Country Nationals (TCN's). A TCN is an
individual who is employed by a U.S. mission abroad and is neither a citizen of the
United States nor of the country to which assigned for duty.

       Non-standard Security System: Those items of security equipment which are not
in the DS inventory and are not maintainable by DS personnel.

        Overseas Security Policy Group (OSPG): The Overseas Security Policy Group
develops, coordinates and promotes uniform policies, standards and agreements on
overseas security operations, programs and projects which affect U.S. Government
civilian agencies represented abroad. The primary functions of the OSPG or subgroups
shall be to formulate and develop overseas security policies and guidance for official
civilian missions. Implementation of policies adopted by the OSPG or by any Agency of
the Federal Government represented at an overseas mission shall be the responsibility of
appropriate officials of that Agency.

       Post Defense Component Office: DoD offices that fall under the control of the
Chief of Mission. The following offices, although only a partial listing, are examples:
Defense Attached Offices (USDAOs), Joint U.S. Military Aid Groups (JUSMAGs), Joint
U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Groups (JUSMAAGs), Joint U.S. Military Missions,
U.S. Military Missions (MILMISH), Military Assistance Advisory Groups (MAAGs),



                                                7                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                          DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




Military Liaison Offices (MLOs), Offices of Defense Cooperation (ODCs), Offices of
Defense Representative (ODRs), Offices of Military Cooperation (OMCs), Security
Assistance Offices (SAOs), Security Assistance Technical Assistance Field Teams
(TAFTs), Select Defense Intelligence Agency Liaison Offices (DIALOs), U.S. Defense
Liaison Offices (USDLOs), U.S. Liaison Offices (USLOs), U.S. Military Groups
(MILGPs), U.S. Military Training Missions (USMTMs), U.S. Mutual Defense Assistance
Office (MDAO).

       Regional Security Officer (RSO): The RSO is a U.S. Foreign Service security
officer serving abroad at an embassy or consulate who is responsible, through the chain
of command to a Chief of Mission, for implementing and managing the Department's
overseas security programs. The specific geographical regions for which RSOs have
responsibility may include one or more Foreign Service posts.

      Sensitive DoD Operational Programs or Activities: Those undertakings by a local
Defense Component office which are mandated by DoD, or national-level authorities,
and which involve sensitive national defense or national security information or matters.
Examples would include: information regarding intelligence activities, sources or
methods; national defense plans or contingencies; special access programs, etc.

      Standard Security Equipment and Systems: Security equipment normally in the
DS inventory and maintainable by DS personnel.


III. GENERAL ISSUES


A. EXISTING POLICY

Nothing in this agreement shall derogate from or be construed to conflict with the
authorities and responsibilities of the Secretary of State, or the Chief of Mission as
described in the Omnibus Act (P.L. 99-399), the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (P.L. 96-
465) and NSDD-38. The following existing agreements are appended to this MOU and
remain in effect between the Departments of State and Defense, to the extent that they do
not conflict with this MOU.

      1. MOU between the Departments of State and Defense on Utilization and
Support of Marine Security Guards, dated December 15, 1986.




                                               8                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                            DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




       2. MQU between the Naval Security and Investigative Command, Department of
the Navy and the Diplomatic Security Service, Department of State relating to the
Investigation of Criminal Counterintelligence Matters dated, 28 March l988.

        3. MOU between the Department of State and the Department of the Navy
Concerning the Use of Naval Support Unit Personnel Assigned to the Department of
State's Security Program, dated December 11, 1978.

      4. DOS-DIA Agreement Regarding Support for TEMPEST Personal Commuters
and Classified Information Handline Systems, incorporating the DOS-DIA Interagency
Control Document (ICD) of 9 Feb 1988.

      5. STATE AIRFRAME A-41, United States Policy with Regard to Local Guard
Forces (LGF) Use by Diplomatic Missions.


B. ISSUES NOT COVERED

Should a particular security issue which is not covered in this MOU develop at a U.S.
mission abroad, the interested officials, with the concurrence of the Chief of Mission, will
refer the matter to the Department of State and, through the established chain of
command, to the DoD Executive Agent for further consideration and subsequent policy
guidance.


C. CONFLICTS AT POST

Should a conflict arise at post between the Defense Component office and the RSO
concerning the substance or interpretation of this MOU, the interested officials will refer
the matter to the Chief of Mission, through the post Emergency Action Committee
(EAC). Before making any decision, the COM may elect to seek information and
recommendations from the Department of State, Director of the Diplomatic Security
Service (DSS) and, through the established chain of command, from the DoD Executive
Agent in Washington, DC.


D. EXEMPTIONS

Certain DoD programs, which come under Chief of Mission authority, because of their



                                                9                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                           DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




sensitivity (as defined in Section II) shall be exempt, on a case-by-case basis, from the
requirements and standards of this MOU. These programs will be separately identified
and coordinated in writing between DUSD(SP) and DS.


IV. PHYSICAL TECHNICAL AND PROCEDURAL SECURITY ISSUES


A. STANDARDS

       (1) DS has the responsibility for developing and issuing physical, technical, and
procedural security standards, in coordination with the members of the OSPG, and
identifying approved security equipment which will enhance the security of all
employees of the foreign affairs agencies and all new and existing installations at U.S.
missions abroad.

       (2) It is the policy of the Department of State to accord security protection on an
equitable basis to all U.S. citizen employees of U.S. missions abroad. Any differences in
the level of security provided to individuals or categories of employees at post must be
based on specific higher threat levels placed on those employees and must be
recommended by the post Emergency Action Committee.

       (3) With regard to the security afforded to sensitive DoD operational programs
and activities, it falls to the local Defense Component office at post to comply with
established security program requirements. DoD agrees to comply with DS minimum
security standards. If a local Defense Component office requests additional security
measures beyond the established minimum level, it will coordinate all requests with the
post RSO. If the RSO and the local Defense Component office cannot agree on the level
of upgrade requested, they will refer the disagreement, through the Chief of Mission, to
the Department of State and, through the established chain of command, the DoD
Executive Agent in Washington, DC and request resolution of the matter. The additional
costs associated with approved security upgrades will be borne by the local Defense
Component office through established funding mechanisms. For sensitive DoD
operations, the DoD Executive Agent will provide the DS with copies of all applicable
DoD Component security requirements which exceed DS standards.

      (4) Existing physical and technical security standards may be modified, whenever
improved deterrents are identified. Physical and technical security equipment will
undergo certification testing by U.S. Government Agencies and commercial testing



                                               10                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                              DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




laboratories that have been approved by DS.     Testing will be done in accordance with
DSS-approved test procedures and performance criteria, to ensure that such equipment
conforms to established physical security standards.

        (5) a. When existing Defense Component office space at post must be relocated,
every effort must be made to obtain new space that meets current security standards. If
the relocation requires moving to a separate facility outside the post chancery building,
every effort will be made to locate a newly constructed facility or an existing building
that meets current security standards. If security standards cannot be met in new space or
in a proposed new building, the Chief of Mission and the Defense Component
headquarters must be informed and a waiver must be approved by the Director of the
Diplomatic Security Service (or designee) before a new facility can be leased or
constructed.

           b. When the Department of State mandates that post Defense Components
be moved to a proposed new facility, yet that facility does not meet all current security
requirements, the RSO, working with appropriate DoS offices (e.g., A/FBO), will prepare
the required waiver package with input from the Defense Component and submit it
formally to the Director of the Diplomatic Security Service through the Chief of Mission.

            c. When the Department of Defense requests that a post Defense Component
relocate to a new facility, yet that facility does not meet all current security requirements,
the DoD Executive Agent will prepare the required waiver package with input from the
post Defense Component, the RSO, and other appropriate DoS elements. The waiver
package will be submitted to the Director of the Diplomatic Security Service, through the
Chief of Mission, and according to established waiver procedures. If a waiver is denied,
the DoD Executive Agent will have the opportunity to present its case to the Security
Exceptions Committee which will evaluate all waiver requests, based on standards
contained in the existing DS Physical Security Standards Handbook.


B. SURVEYS CONDUCTED BY SECURITY PERSONNEL NOT RESIDENT AT
POST:

The DS either on its own (with prior notification to the Chief of Mission and to Defense
Component Headquarters through the DoD Executive Agent) or, at the request of
Defense Component officials, will be responsible for conducting complete physical,
technical, and procedural surveys of all Defense Component offices attached to U.S.
missions abroad. The security officer conducting the surveys will make



                                                 11                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                            DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




recommendations based on standards established in the existing DS Physical Security
Standards Handbook and will advise the senior official of the Defense Component office
at post, as well as the Chief of Mission, of any weaknesses or deficiencies noted in the
course of such surveys. Copies of the survey will be provided to the DoD Executive
Agent and DS. DoD will be afforded the opportunity to review and comment on survey
recommendations which affect the operations of Defense Component office facilities.


C. SECURITY PROGRAM INSPECTIONS

Representatives of Defense Component Headquarters may conduct periodic or
emergency surveys and inspections of their local Defense Component office facilities
abroad. Such surveys and inspections may only be conducted with prior notification to
the RSO at post through DSS. Further, Defense Component Headquarters and the DoD
Executive Agent may review the adequacy of the local guard and residential security
services provided to Defense Component offices. On such occasions, the RSO shall
make available to Defense Component Headquarters inspectors such information
pertaining to Defense Component offices as may be required. Defense Component
Headquarters will provide the DSS and the DoD Executive Agent with copies of the final
reports of security inspections made by its personnel. If additional resources are required
to support DoD's findings, this determination must be referred to both Departments for
further coordination. Prior to departure from the post, the Defense Component
Headquarters representative conducting the inspection will review the recommendations
or issues with the RSO, attempt to resolve them, and provide the RSO with a copy of the
draft report. Any remaining differences in recommendations or issues which cannot be
resolved at post between the inspecting Defense Component Headquarters representative
and the RSO, will be handled in accordance with the procedures in Section III-C. of this
agreement entitled, "Conflicts at Post".


D. LOCAL GUARD PROGRAM

The RSO shall establish and implement local guard procedures necessary for the security
of post Defense Component official facilities and residences. The level of protection
provided to the Defense Component office will comply with approved OSPG Local
Guard Program standards.




                                               12                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                          DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




E. RESIDENTIAL SECURITY

The RSO will establish and implement a residential security program applicable to all
American personnel under the authority of a Chief of Mission. The level of protection
provided to the Defense Component office will comply with approved OSPG Residential
Security standards.


F. ARMORED VEHICLES

On a reimbursable basis, Defense Components may arrange with DS to install light
vehicle armoring to DoS specifications in local Defense Component office vehicles. The
level of protection provided to the Defense Component office will comply with approved
OSPG Armored Vehicle standards.


G. FORCED ENTRY/PENETRATION

All instances involving the physical penetration of a building, including unauthorized
entry or damage to property, as well as possible compromise of classified information,
will be reported by Defense Component Office personnel to the RSO and the Chief of
Mission. The RSO will conduct appropriate investigations and provide the Chief of
Mission and the Executive Agent with the full details of the incident, as well as any
follow-up action, by telegram via the Department of State.

Suspected technical security penetrations and hazards discovered by post Defense
Component personnel will be reported to the RSO for appropriate action. Reports of
technical security penetrations of or hazards in post Defense Component offices will be
provided expeditiously to the DoD Executive Agent by DS, under the provisions of the
DCI Procedural Guide I-II-III.


H. STORAGE OF CLASSIFIED MATERIALS

U.S. missions will store and safeguard classified and administratively controlled
materials, in accordance with DoS regulations and policies. At facilities approved for
storage of classified information, the RSO will designate controlled access areas and
establish supervisory controls over the distribution and storage of classified and
administratively controlled materials. All Defense Component offices are subject to



                                               13                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                              DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




accreditation by DS for classified storage up to an authorized security classification level,
in accordance with DoS Security Standards for the Storage of Classified information at
posts abroad.


I. SECURITY VIOLATIONS

The RSO will implement security violation reporting procedures for Defense Component
office facilities, in conformance with those specified in existing DoS regulations and
policies. All classified material violations involving Defense Component office
personnel will be reported directly by the RSO, through mission channels, to the DoD
Executive Agent and Defense Component Headquarters for administrative or disciplinary
action within thirty (30) days after the violation is discovered. Copies of these reports will
also be sent by the RSO to DS.


J. POST TRAINING AND ORIENTATION

The RSO will include U.S. Defense Component office employees at post in training and
indoctrination lectures, crisis management drills and in the dissemination of security
awareness materials.


K. UNIT SECURITY OFFICERS

Where determined to be of practical operational value and in consultation with the RSO,
a Unit Security Officer will be appointed by the Defense Component office at post. The
Unit Security Officer will be responsible for the conduct of daily physical, technical and
procedural security services for the Defense Component office and will assist the RSO, as
requested, in DoD investigative activities. The Unit Security Officer will be trained and
guided by the RSO in the execution of security functions for post Defense Component
offices.


L. REPORTS

Copies of routine reports or correspondence pertaining to all activities conducted by or
under the direction of the RSQ, dealing with the Defense Component office physical,
technical, or procedural security matters, will be furnished through mission channels and



                                                 14                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                             DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




DS, to the Defense Component Headquarters and DoD Executive Agent.
Recommendations for correcting deficiencies as well as corrective action taken will be
included in such reports. Alerts, security incidents, or notices of threats to U.S. personnel
and facilities under the authority of a Chief of Mission, involving local Defense
Component offices or personnel, will be provided to Defense Component Headquarters,
the DoD Executive Agent, and the area Commander immediately by telegram. Similarly,
Defense Component Headquarters and the DoD Executive Agent will provide copies of
correspondence to DS headquarters and RSOs, when communicating on such matters
with Defense Component offices at post.


M. INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SECURITY SYSTEMS

Subject to survey recommendations, DS will install standard security systems at Defense
Component offices at post upon request of the DoD Executive Agent, either by using
Security Engineering Officers, Seabees, or Security Engineering Contractors or other
cleared American contractors. Equipment installed shall either be procured by DoD
Component Offices at post or, obtained from the DS inventory. The maintenance of
standard DS technical security equipment at Defense Component offices at post will be
included in the DS Security Engineering Maintenance Program. The maintenance of
non-standard equipment, which is not in DS inventory, will be the responsibility of the
post Defense Component office. In cases where Defense Components require technical
equipment which is non-standard to the DoS inventory, the local Defense Component
office will procure, install and maintain the equipment at its own cost. Non-standard
technical equipment will only be used if a DS Security Engineering Officer certifies that
it will not interfere with any standard DoS equipment installed. The Defense Component
office, with DS concurrence, may contract separately for maintenance of security systems
at remote sites which require extensive maintenance of a timely and frequent nature.


N. REQUESTS FOR RSO ASSISTANCE/JOINT INSPECTIONS

Requests from Defense Components Headquarters or the DoD Executive Agent to the
RSO for physical, technical and procedural security assistance not addressed elsewhere in
this MOU will be cleared through the DSS Directorate of Overseas Operations
(DS/DSS/OP). In the event of dissatisfaction with security services provided by the RSO
to post Defense Components offices and when attempts to resolve problems in
consultation with the RSO have failed, the post Defense Component office may bring its
concerns to the Chief of Mission, through the Emergency Action Committee (EAC), in



                                                15                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                              DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




accordance with Section III C. of this MOU. The EAC may recommend to the Chief of
Mission that a joint inspection of the facilities be performed by the headquarters staff of
DS and representatives of the DoD Executive Agent or Defense Component
Headquarters, to assess the security services being provided to post Defense Components
offices.


O TECHNICAL SECURITY

DS Security Engineering Officers (SEO's) will include post Defense Component offices
in routine technical security countermeasures (TSCM) inspections of controlled access
areas at post, where the technical threat warrants such routine inspections. DoD is
responsible for the costs of TSCM inspections of Defense Component offices at posts
where DS has determined that the technical threat does not warrant more frequent
inspections. The Defense Component Headquarters or the DoD Executive Agent may
dispatch people and equipment to post to conduct technical security inspections and
investigations of post Defense Component Offices. Such activities will be coordinated in
advance with DS, the RSO and the DoD Executive Agent. All information obtained from
such investigations will be shared with the RSO, the Defense Component Office at post,
DS and the DoD Executive Agent and reported to them following the DCI Procedural
Guide I-II-III.


P. CONSTRUCTION SECURITY

The Department of State will provide DoD with the construction security training
required to enable DoD personnel to perform construction security on non-A/FBO
projects in DAO office space within U.S. missions abroad. This training will involve
construction surveillance techniques and guard responsibilities. Non-A/FBO projects are
those which do not substantially change the structural, mechanical, electrical, life-safety,
or architectural systems within a U.S. mission abroad.


V. INVESTIGATIONS


A. GENERAL

DS has, inter alias, the responsibility for investigating: a) U.S. Citizen applicants,



                                                 16                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                            DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




b) foreign national applicants, and c) employees and contractors of DoD at U.S. missions
abroad. All requests for investigations, except routine embassy source and police checks
originated by the post Defense Component office, will be channeled through DSS to the
RSO, or processed as specified in separate agreements. Requests for routine embassy
source checks may be made directly to the RSO or Post Security Officer (PSO) by the
post: Defense Component office. Copies of investigative reports, contact reports and
correspondence relating to investigative support of DoD matters or personnel will be
furnished to the DoD Executive Agent via DSS. DoD may, at its discretion, dispatch
persons from its Defense Component headquarters staff to inquire into a DoD
investigative matter. All such activity will be coordinated in advance with the Chief of
Mission through the RSO and DS headquarters.


B. U.S. CITIZEN EMPLOYEES FOREIGN NATIONAL SPOUSES & FIANCEES,
AND CONTRACTORS

(1) U.S. citizen employees, spouses and contractors of post Defense Components
assigned on a permanent and temporary basis at U.S. Missions abroad may be
investigated by the RSO: (a) upon the request of the Defense Component headquarters
through the DoD Executive Agent and DS, or (b) at the direction of the Chief of Mission,
when allegations or complaints of a security nature are received. It is DS policy that
RSO's are not authorized to initiate an investigation of a U.S. citizen employee or
applicant abroad without the advanced approval of the appropriate DS headquarters
element. Should the Chief of Mission direct such an investigation, the RSO may proceed
but must immediately notify DS of all relevant information. Prior to initiating an official
investigation of any post Defense Component employee or contractor, and subsequent to
preliminary inquiries of allegations or complaints, the RSO will report the case to the
DoD Executive Agent, via DS, as expeditiously as possible.

(2) No U.S. citizen employee or contractor of DoD, who is the subject of an official
investigation by the RSO, shall be interviewed without the approval of and instructions
from Defense Component headquarters and the DoD Executive Agent through DS, unless
requested by the Chief of Mission. Any time the RSO conducts a formal investigation
concerning U.S. citizen employees or contractors of DoD, a full report shall be forwarded
to the Defense Component Headquarters and the DoD Executive Agent via DS. Urgent
matters shall be handled by telegram.

(3) Investigations of foreign national spouses or proposed foreign national spouses of
U.S. citizen employees will be conducted consistent with State Department personnel



                                               17                                       ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                           DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




policies, as staged in Volume Three of the Foreign Affairs Manual (3 FAM). Such
investigations may be supplemented by DoD, in accordance with established personnel
security investigation procedures, when deemed in the interest of national security.


C. FOREIGN NATIONAL EMPLOYEES AND CONTRACTORS

(1) The RSO and the Defense Component office at post will ensure that all foreign
nationals proposed for contractual status or employment are investigated, in accordance
with established procedures and that the RSO will issue a certification for employment in
each approved case. Investigations should be completed prior to employment or
execution of a contract. However, such persons may be employed on an interim basis,
upon the completion of a satisfactory local investigation and temporary certification by
the RSO. Continued employment will be contingent upon satisfactory results of a
completed investigation. Foreign National employees and contractors are to be re-
investigated and certified every five years.

(2) Allegations of misconduct against foreign national employees and contractors will be
investigated by or under the direction of the RSO. Detailed reports of such investigations
shall be forwarded to the DoD Executive Agent through DS. The results of such
investigations shall be the basis for a determination by the RSO of corrective action to be
taken, subject to the concurrence of the Chief of Mission. The RSO will refer to Defense
Component Headquarters through DS and the DoD Executive Agent, any cases for which
the Chief of Mission believes a decision should be made by Defense Component
Headquarters.

(3) The RSO and the Defense Component office at post will ensure that every foreign
national, whose position at post requires access to administratively controlled
information, is properly investigated and certified,

(4) Security checks and/or investigations of domestic staff of U.S. Defense Component
office employees will be conducted consistent with post policy.


VI. TRAINING

A. DS will sponsor DoD Executive Agent personnel for appropriate security-related
training offered by the Diplomatic Security Training Center (DS/TC), commensurate




                                               18                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                          DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




with the security clearance level and the need-to-know of the applicant. Such
sponsorship is subject to course quota availability.

B. The DoD Executive Agent will sponsor DS personnel for appropriate security-related
training, commensurate with the security clearance level and need-to-know of the
applicant. Such sponsorship is subject to course quota availability.


VII. BUDGET AND REIMBURSEMENT

A. The Department of State and the Department of Defense will fund diplomatic security
programs as specified in the Security Funding Matrix (Appendix A). DoS will fund,
within funds available, standard DS security equipment and support that is commensurate
with established threat levels. DoD Defense Components will fund non-standard DS
security equipment and support which exceeds established threat levels. DoD Defense
Component funding will be administered directly between the Defense component and
the contract supporting this service or support.

B. All DS resource planning will be conducted in consultation with agencies represented
at U.S. missions abroad, in order to provide an annual consolidated overseas security
budget proposal.

C. Defense Component headquarters, utilizing its authority to protect its personnel and
operations under the Internal Security Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 797), interalia, will
authorize local Defense Component offices to reimburse the Department of State for
security services rendered to local Defense Component offices that exceed DoS funding
allocations, upon formal notification of the DoD Executive Agent by DS of the projected
security program funding shortfall.

      1. Whenever possible, funding shortfalls should be identified in advance of the
budget execution year.

       2. Reimbursement will be handled at the post level through standard procedures
for reimbursement for services rendered and will be based upon actual or allocated costs
of services rendered to the local Defense Component office under the aegis of the
Emergency Action Committee.




                                              19                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                          DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




VIII. IMPLEMENTATION AND TERMINATION

This Memorandum of Understanding will become effective upon signature by
the representatives of the Department of State and the Department of Defense
named below. It will remain in force until notification by either party, sixty
days in advance, of its intention to terminate the conditions of the agreement.




                                              20                                      ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                                                DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




                                               APPENDIX A

                       DEPARTMENT OF STATE AND DEPARTMENT OF
                          DEFENSE SECURITY FUNDING MATRIX


Delineation of Funding Responsibilities in MOU


Program                                                                                          DoD       DoS


Armored Vehicles (FAV & LAV)
Procurement, armoring & transportation                                                           X
Inspection                                                                                       X


Local Guards (See Note)                                                                                    X


Residential Security
Purchase, install and maintain residential upgrades                                                        X



Physical Security, Non-Residential Buildings
Purchase, install and maintain DS standard equipment for non-residential upgrades                          X
Purchase, install and maintain non-standard equipment for non-residential upgrade                X
Surveys of DoD facilities                                                                                  X


Technical Security
Purchase, install and maintain DS standard equipment to meet DS security standards                         X
Purchase, install and maintain non-standard equipment or equipment exceeding DS standards        X
Maintain equipment at remote DoD sites for which DoS cannot provide timely service Surveys of              X
DoD facilities


NOTE: Local Defense Component offices are authorized to reimburse DS for the local Defense
Component office's share of costs, which exceed the approved field budget plan for a post. LGP costs
include roving patrols, static guards and counter surveillance teams where appropriate. Cost share
determinations will be based upon the actual or allocated cost of services rendered to the local Defense
Component office.




                                                            21                                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                                                  DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




Delineation of Funding Responsibilities in MOU


Program                                                                                             DoD     DoS


Technical Countermeasures
Routine TSCM inspections of DoD controlled access areas.                                                    X
TSCM inspections of DoD controlled access areas which exceed standard determined by post            X
threat level


Transit Security
Secure shipment, storage and surveillance of construction materials for FBO projects at DoD                 X
controlled access areas
Secure shipment, storage and surveillance of construction materials for non-FBO projects at         X
DoD controlled access areas
Secure shipment, storage and surveillance of non-classified sensitive materials unrelated to        X
construction projects


Construction Security
Surveillance and guards for FBO projects at DoD controlled access areas                                     X
Surveillance and guards for non-FBO projects at DoD controlled access areas                         X


Training and Orientation
At-post security training specifically requested by DoD and restricted to their personnel only, both X
US and FSN
Washington-based security training offered by DS and DS/TC                                          X


Investigations
Overseas background investigations (US & FSN) of prospective DoD employees at US missions           X
abroad
Investigations of foreign national spouses                                                                  X




                                                             22                                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                           DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




                                  E2. ENCLOSURE 2

                             Attorney General Guidelines for
                         FBI Supervision or conduct of Espionage
              Investigations of U.S. Diplomatic Missions Personnel Abroad



Section 603 of the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1990 clarifies the
responsibilities of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other Departments and
Agencies of the United States with regard to the investigation of suspected violations of
the espionage laws by personnel (including foreign service nationals) employed by, or
assigned or attached to, United States diplomatic missions abroad ("U.S. personnel").
These guidelines, developed in consultation with affected Departments and Agencies, are
intended to implement that section and provide for appropriate coordination, reporting
and investigation concerning such matters.


I. REPORTING TO THE FBI BY OTHER DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES

       All Departments and Agencies shall report immediately to the FBI any
information, allegations, or circumstances involving any "U.S. personnel" who may be
engaged in violations of the espionage laws of the United States. Departments and
Agencies with law enforcement investigative authorities may rely upon their internal
guidelines or procedures that establish predicates for opening investigations concerning
suspected violations of the espionage laws of the United States as a threshold for
determining when a report to the FBI is required under these guidelines. Departments
and Agencies that do not have such authority should report to the FBI whenever
sufficient information is available to indicate any "U.S. personnel" at a particular
diplomatic mission (whether or not specifically identified by name) may be engaged in
such activities.

       At minimum, it is contemplated that the FBI will be advised at once whenever any
Department or Agency identifies any particular "U.S. personnel" as possibly having
violated the espionage laws of the United States. Information concerning routine
screening or suitability matters or violations of security regulations or procedures by
"U.S. personnel" need not be reported unless indications of connections to foreign
government entities that may involve espionage are developed. Unsubstantiated, non-
specific information also need not be reported unless there appears to be a connection



                                               23                                      ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                             DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




between "U.S. personnel" and possible espionage.

       Whenever there is any question concerning whether information should be
reported to the FBI, informal consultations should take place between the FBI and
Department or Agency representatives at the headquarters level. Issues unresolved by
these informal consultations shall be directed to the Office of Intelligence Policy for
resolution in consultation with the Internal Security Section of the Criminal Division.
Thereafter, any continuing concerns by Departments and Agencies may be raised with
the Attorney General for resolution.

     All reporting under these guidelines shall be made under the secure means of
communication that is available.


II. CONDUCT AND SUPERVISION OF INVESTIGATIONS

       As a general matter, the FBI has overall responsibility for the conduct of
espionage investigations at United States embassies and other diplomatic establishments
outside the United States. In furtherance of this responsibility, the FBI shall supervise the
conduct of, or conduct itself as explained further below, all investigations of violations of
the espionage laws of the United States by any "U.S. personnel."

       Whether FBI personnel should actually conduct or supervise such an investigation
is a matter for the FBI to determine, in appropriate consultation with relevant
Departments and Agencies, depending upon the particular facts and circumstances of
each case. Any decision to send FBI personnel abroad for such purposes shall be
coordinated with relevant Agencies and Departments and approved by the Director of
Central Intelligence as required by applicable guidelines and procedures and is subject to
the approval of the Secretary of State and the Chief of Mission consistent with 22 U.S.C.
4802(b) (l) and 3927.

       Whenever the FBI determines it to be appropriate and desirable, investigative
capabilities, resources and lawful techniques available to other Departments and
Agencies, particularly those whose employees or contractors may be suspected of an
espionage violation, shall be utilized in furtherance of such an investigation. In these
instances, the FBI shall supervise the activities of the investigating Departments or
Agencies and shall be informed contemporaneously of all significant developments. Any
assistance requested or provided under this authority shall be consistent with the
respective authorities and responsibilities of the Departments and Agencies.



                                                24                                       ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                             DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




       In appropriate cases, the FBI may establish an investigative team under the
supervision of FBI personnel and including investigative or other relevant officials of
other Departments and Agencies.

       Any issues or concerns with respect to the FBI's exercise of its authority in
particular investigations shall be directed to the Internal Security Section of the Criminal
Division for resolution. Thereafter, any continuing concerns by Departments or Agencies
may be raised with the Attorney General for resolution.


III. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

       A decision by the FBI to terminate or not to pursue an espionage investigation in a
particular case does not preclude further investigation by appropriate Departments and
Agencies provided that such activities are conducted in consultation with the FBI and any
information concerning possible violations of the espionage statutes that may be
subsequently developed is reported immediately to the FBI.

      Nothing in these guidelines shall be construed to establish any defense to any
criminal, civil, or administrative action.

        Nothing in these guidelines is intended to alter the responsibilities of the Director
of Central Intelligence under the National Security Act of 1947 for the protection of
intelligence sources and methods or under Executive Order 12333 for counterintelligence
liaison with the intelligence and security services of foreign governments, or the
responsibility of the Central Intelligence Agency under that Order for the coordination of
counterintelligence activities abroad.

      Nothing in these guidelines is intended to affect decisions by the Justice
Department, in appropriate consultation with relevant Departments and Agencies,
concerning the prosecution of any particular case.

       Nothing in these guidelines is intended to provide the FBI with the authority to
coordinate the conduct of damage assessments in connection with possible espionage
violations. Departments and Agencies that conduct such assessments should recognize,
however, that such assessments may have some impact upon the success of an
investigation or a potential prosecution and consult with the FBI and the Department of
Justice as appropriate.




                                                 25                                      ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                             DODI 5210.84, Jan. 22, 1992




       Nothing in these guidelines is intended to alter any limitation placed upon the
functions of another Department or Agency and its personnel by law, executive order,
regulation, or Attorney General-approved procedures or guidelines, including procedures
related to the conduct of non-law enforcement counterintelligence activities outside the
United States by the FBI.

        Nothing in these guidelines is intended to alter obligations by agencies within the
Intelligence Community to report violations of Federal statutes under section 1.7(a) of
Executive order 12333 or Implementing procedures promulgated thereunder.

       Nothing in these guidelines shall be construed to authorize a violation of any
applicable Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).

       Nothing in these guidelines is intended to alter the statutory authority of the
Secretary of State for all aspects of diplomatic security as set forth in the Omnibus
Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986.

       Proposals to amend these guidelines shall be directed to the Office of
 Intelligence Policy and Review.




                                                 26                                      ENCLOSURE 2
