                                   Department of Defense
                                       DIRECTIVE
                                                                            NUMBER 5134.15
                                                                               May 17, 2011

                                                                                        DA&M

SUBJECT: Assistant Secretary of Defense for Operational Energy Plans and Programs
         (ASD(OEPP))

References: (a) Sections 138(b)(9), 138c, and 2925(b) of title 10, United States Code
            (b) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Implementation Guidance for
                the Office of the Director of Operational Energy Plans and Programs,”
                October 19, 2009 (hereby cancelled)
            (c) Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-19, “Legislative
                Coordination and Clearance,” September 20, 1979
            (d) DoD Instruction 5025.01, “DoD Directives Program,” October 28, 2007
            (e) DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,”
                March 6, 2007


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

    a. Implements sections 138(b)(9) and 138c of Reference (a) and assigns responsibilities and
functions, relationships, and authorities to the ASD(OEPP), pursuant to the authority vested in
the Secretary of Defense by Reference (a).

   b. Supercedes and cancels Reference (b).


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the “DoD Components”). The term “Military Services,” as used herein, refers to
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps.


3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS. The ASD(OEPP) is the principal advisor to the
Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
                                                                   DoDD 5134.15, May 17, 2011

Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)) and the principal policy official within the senior
management of the DoD regarding operational energy plans and programs. In this capacity, the
ASD(OEPP) shall:

    a. Provide leadership and facilitate communication regarding, and conduct oversight to
manage and be accountable for, operational energy plans and programs within the DoD,
including the Military Services.

   b. Establish and maintain the operational energy strategy and prepare the Annual Report
Related to Operational Energy.

   c. Coordinate and oversee planning and program activities of the DoD, including the
Military Services, related to:

       (1) Implementation of the operational energy strategy.

      (2) The consideration of operational energy demands in the DoD planning,
programming, budgeting, and execution activities and requirements and acquisition processes.

       (3) Research and development investments related to operational energy demand and
supply technologies.

   d. Monitor and review all operational energy initiatives in the DoD.

    e. Provide advice to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense with respect to
operational energy plans and programs to be carried out pursuant to the operational energy
strategy.

    f. Provide guidance to, and consult with, the OSD Principal Staff Assistants, the Secretaries
of the Military Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, other OSD officials, and the senior operational energy officials with
respect to specific operational energy plans and programs to be carried out pursuant to the
operational energy strategy.

   g. Review and make recommendations to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense
and the USD(AT&L) regarding all budgetary and financial matters relating to the operational
energy strategy. In support of the annual operational energy budget certification:

       (1) Review the proposed budgets for each fiscal year and submit to the Secretary of
Defense and the USD(AT&L), no later than January 31 of that fiscal year, a preliminary report
containing comments with respect to the proposed budgets and a certification regarding whether
the proposed budgets are adequate for implementation of the strategy.

      (2) Actively participate in, and provide guidance integrated into, the Planning,
Programming, Budgeting, and Execution process, and:




                                                2
                                                                   DoDD 5134.15, May 17, 2011

           (a) Recommend, through the USD(AT&L) to the Secretary of Defense, appropriate
funding levels for operational energy-related programs.

         (b) Represent operational energy-related programs and accounts as a member of the
Program Review Group or equal management structure during the Program Review.

            (c) Recommend, through the USD(AT&L) to the Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller) (USD(C))/Chief Financial Officer (CFO)), Department of Defense, resource and
programmatic adjustments to the Budget Estimate Submission for the President’s Budget
Request on specific operational energy programs and technology areas to meet military goals and
objectives, as determined by the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
and the Secretaries of the Military Departments.

        (3) Submit annually to the Secretary of Defense and Congress a report on the
certification of proposed budgets, with explanation for any budgets not certified, in accordance
with subparagraph 4.g.(1) and section 138c of Reference (a). The report shall include:

           (a) A discussion of the actions that the ASD(OEPP) proposes to take and any
recommended legislation that the ASD(OEPP) considers appropriate to address the adequacy of
the proposed budgets in meeting operational energy strategic goals. The discussion of
recommended legislation must be consistent with the DoD Legislative Program and Office of
Management and Budget Circular No. A-19 (Reference (c)).

          (b) Any additional comments that the ASD(OEPP) considers appropriate regarding
the adequacy of the proposed budgets.

             (c) A separate statement of estimated expenditures and requested appropriations for
that fiscal year for ASD(OEPP) activities undertaken in order to carry out his or her duties.

   h. Serve on other DoD, interagency, treaty organization and non-governmental boards,
committees, and groups concerned with matters pertaining to assigned responsibilities and
functions and represent the Secretary of Defense on such matters outside the DoD.

  i. Provide operational energy annual goals and long-term goals for inclusion in the annual
DoD performance plan and Strategic Management Plan.

  j. Perform other duties as assigned by the Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Defense or the
USD(AT&L).




                                                3
                                                                   DoDD 5134.15, May 17, 2011

5. RELATIONSHIPS

    a. The ASD(OEPP) may communicate views on matters related to operational energy plans
and programs and the operational energy strategy directly to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary
of Defense without obtaining the approval or concurrence of any other official within the DoD.
As such, in the performance of assigned responsibilities and functions, the ASD(OEPP) shall:

       (1) Serve under the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense.

       (2) Report to the USD(AT&L).

      (3) Use existing systems, facilities, and services of the DoD and other Federal agencies,
when possible, to avoid duplication and achieve maximum efficiency and economy.

       (4) Coordinate and exchange information with other OSD officials, the Heads of the
DoD Components, the Military Departments’ senior operational energy officials, and other
Federal officials having collateral or related responsibilities and functions.

   b. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

       (1) Designate and maintain a senior operational energy official for each armed force
under that department.

        (2) Ensure their senior operational energy official coordinates with the ASD(OEPP) and
implements initiatives for their respective Military Service pursuant to the operational energy
strategy.

       (3) Submit to the ASD(OEPP) the results of all studies and initiatives conducted by the
Military Department in connection with the operational energy strategy.

    c. In support of the annual operational energy budget certification, the Secretaries of the
Military Departments and the Directors of Defense Agencies with responsibility for executing
activities associated with the operational energy strategy shall transmit proposed budgets for
those activities for a fiscal year to the ASD(OEPP) 10 days before submission of the budgets to
the USD(C)/CFO. The Directors of Defense Agencies shall transmit their budgets through their
respective OSD Principal Staff Assistants.

   d. The other OSD officials and the Heads of the DoD Components shall:

        (1) Coordinate with the ASD(OEPP) on all matters under their purview related to the
authorities, responsibilities, and functions assigned to the ASD(OEPP).

        (2) Provide the ASD(OEPP) access to all records and data in the DoD (including the
records and data of each Military Department) necessary to permit the ASD(OEPP) to carry out
his or her duties.




                                                4
                                                                    DoDD 5134.15, May 17, 2011

   e. The USD(C)/CFO shall include the ASD(OEPP) on the distribution of Program Decision
and similar budget decision documents throughout the annual budget review process.


6. AUTHORITIES. The ASD(OEPP) is hereby delegated authority to:

   a. Act for the Secretary of Defense regarding submittal of required reports to Congress,
pursuant to sections 138c and 2925(b) of Reference (a).

    b. Approve and sign DoD Instructions, DoD Manuals, and one-time Directive-Type
Memorandums, in accordance with DoD Instruction 5025.01 (Reference (d)), that implement
policy approved by the Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Defense or the USD(AT&L) in areas of
assigned responsibility and function. Instructions to the Military Departments shall be issued
through the Secretaries of the Military Departments. Instructions to the Combatant Commands
normally shall be communicated through, and coordinated with, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff.

   c. Obtain reports and information in accordance with DoD Instruction 8910.01
(Reference (e)), as necessary, to carry out assigned responsibilities and functions.

    d. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry out
assigned responsibilities and functions, including transmitting requests for advice and assistance.
Communications to the Military Departments shall be transmitted through the Secretaries of the
Military Departments or their senior operational energy officials, or as otherwise provided in law
or directed by the Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the
Combatant Commanders normally shall be transmitted through, and coordinated with, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

    e. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the Legislative Branch,
members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments, as appropriate, to carry out
assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with representatives of the Legislative
Branch shall be coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs and
the USD(C)/CFO, as appropriate, and be consistent with the DoD Legislative Program.


7. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Directive is approved for public release and is
available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Website at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.




                                                 5
                                                              DoDD 5134.15, May 17, 2011

8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective upon its publication to the DoD Issuances
Website.




Enclosure
 Glossary




                                            6
                                                                     DoDD 5134.15, May 17, 2011

                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ASD(OEPP)       Assistant Secretary of Defense for Operational Energy Plans and Programs


USD(AT&L) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(C)/CFO Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, DoD



                                    PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

annual operational energy budget certification. The budgetary review and reporting activities of
the ASD(OEPP), as required by section 138c(e) of Reference (a). These activities include:
review of all proposed DoD operational energy-related budgets, certification of their adequacy
for implementing the operational energy strategy, and preparation of a Congressional report on
budget certification.

Annual Report Related to Operational Energy. The annual report on operational energy
management and the implementation of the operational energy strategy submitted to the
Congressional Defense Committees, as required by section 2925(b) of Reference (a).

operational energy. The energy required for training, moving, and sustaining military forces and
weapons platforms for military operations. The term includes energy used by power systems,
generators, logistics assets, and weapons platforms employed by military forces during training
and in the field. Operational energy does not include the energy consumed by facilities on
permanent DoD installations, with the exception of installations or missions supporting military
operations. Operational energy does not include the fuel consumed by non-tactical vehicles.

operational energy strategy. A DoD-wide strategy for operational energy that provides near-
term, mid-term, and long-term goals, performance metrics to measure progress in meeting the
goals, and a plan for implementation of the strategy within OSD, the Military Departments, and
the Defense Agencies.

senior operational energy official. The senior official assigned responsibility for operational
energy plans and programs within each Military Service, as designated by the Secretary of the
respective Military Department.




                                                 7                                   GLOSSARY
