                              Department of Defense
                                     DIRECTIVE

                                                                               NUMBER 5010.42
                                                                                  May 15, 2008

                                                                                            DCMO

SUBJECT:      DoD-Wide Continuous Process Improvement (CPI)/Lean Six Sigma (LSS)
              Program

References: (a) Section 113 of title 10, United States Code
            (b) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DoD-Wide Continuous Process
                Improvement (CPI)/Lean Six Sigma (LSS),” April 30, 2007 (hereby canceled)
            (c) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of DoD-wide
                Continuous Process Improvement (CPI) Programs,” May 11, 2006


1. PURPOSE. In accordance with the authority in Reference (a), this Directive:

   a. Incorporates and cancels Reference (b).

    b. Establishes policy and assigns responsibilities to institutionalize CPI/LSS as one of the
primary approaches to assessing and improving the efficiency and effectiveness of DoD
processes in support of the Department’s national defense mission.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:

  a. The objective of the DoD CPI/LSS program is to strengthen joint operational Combatant
Command and Military Department capabilities including making improvements in:

       (1) Productivity.

       (2) Performance against mission (availability, reliability, cycle time, investment, and
operating costs).
                                                                  DoDD 5010.42, May 15, 2008



       (3) Safety.

       (4) Flexibility to meet DoD mission needs.

       (5) Energy efficiency.

    b. CPI/LSS concepts and tools should be applied to benefit the full range of DoD
organizations. These include combat, industrial, service, and office environments of
headquarters, field, and operational organizations. The DoD Components should participate in
defining, implementing, and sustaining CPI/LSS efforts. Each DoD Component should use
CPI/LSS concepts and tools to improve the full range of processes and activities that comprise
their operations, including decision-making processes and appropriate engagement with
industrial base suppliers.

    c. CPI/LSS programs shall be used to help meet organizational objectives. CPI/LSS
methods, terminology, training plans, and other program elements may be adapted as required.
Given diverse operational requirements, the DoD Components shall have full flexibility to
identify CPI/LSS focus areas and training plans and may adapt other CPI/LSS program elements
for their use.

    d. Resource benefits resulting from CPI/LSS improvements in overall operating
effectiveness may be retained by the DoD Components that generate them (Deputy Secretary of
Defense Memorandum (Reference (c))). Effective management oversight should lead to
reinvestment in additional CPI/LSS efforts, recapitalization, and further strengthening of
operational capability.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

   a. The Deputy Chief Management Officer shall:

      (1) Establish the DoD CPI/LSS Program Office to serve as the DoD proponent for
CPI/LSS.

       (2) Develop and maintain applicable CPI/LSS guidance, standards, and best practice
information for the DoD Components, to include a DoD-wide CPI awards program and CPI/LSS
performance objectives initiatives consistent with Reference (c).

   b. The Heads of DoD Components shall:

       (1) Ensure implementation of CPI/LSS policies consistent with this Directive and the
guidance in Reference (c).

       (2) Implement CPI/LSS programs to improve overall effectiveness and efficiency across
missions and functions to gain the broadest possible range of organizational improvements.



                                               2
                                                                   DoDD 5010.42, May 15, 2008



        (3) Develop and implement appropriate education and training procedures and promote
CPI/LSS career development opportunities, to include a CPI/LSS award and performance
objective initiative as appropriate.

        (4) Establish CPI/LSS education, training, and certification procedures consistent with
DoD-wide guidelines and standards and include CPI/LSS in individual employee performance
objectives as appropriate.


5. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Directive is approved for public release. Copies
may be obtained through the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at
http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.


6. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective immediately.




                                                3
