                              Department of Defense
                                     DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 5111.12E
                                                                                 March 18, 2010
                                                         Incorporating Change 1, August 23, 2017

                                                                                             DCMO

SUBJECT:      Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation (WHINSEC)

References: See Enclosure


1. PURPOSE. This Directive:

   a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5111.12 (Reference (a)).

    b. Continues the WHINSEC with the mission, organization and management,
responsibilities and functions, authorities, and relationships as prescribed herein pursuant to the
authorities provided in section 343 of title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) (Reference (b)).

    c. Designates the Secretary of the Army as the DoD Executive Agent (EA) for the
WHINSEC with the authority and responsibility to operate the WHINSEC as an education and
training facility on behalf of the Secretary of Defense pursuant to sections 113 and 343 of
Reference (b), DoDD 5101.1 (Reference (c)), and the guidance contained in this Directive.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the
Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD
Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter
referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. MISSION. The WHINSEC shall provide professional education and training to eligible
military, law enforcement, and civilian personnel of nations of the Western Hemisphere within
the context of the democratic principles set forth in the Charter of the Organization of American
States (Reference (d)), such charter being a treaty to which the United States is a party. The
WHINSEC shall foster mutual knowledge, transparency, confidence, and cooperation among the
participating nations and promote democratic values, respect for human rights, and knowledge
and understanding of U.S. customs and traditions.
                                                                   DoDD 5111.12E, March 18, 2010



4. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

    a. The WHINSEC is established as a DoD school under the authority, direction, and control
of the Secretary of the Army, as the DoD EA for the WHINSEC.

    b. The WHINSEC shall consist of a Commandant and such subordinate organizational
elements as are established by the Commandant within the resources authorized by the Secretary
of the Army, as the DoD EA. The Commandant of the WHINSEC shall be appointed by the
Secretary of the Army, as the DoD EA for the WHINSEC, with the concurrence of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), who serves as the OSD Principal Staff Assistant
assigned to oversee the activities of the DoD EA.

    c. A Board of Visitors for the WHINSEC shall be maintained in accordance with section 343
of Reference (b).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS

    a. Secretary of the Army. The Secretary of the Army, as the DoD EA for the WHINSEC,
shall:

       (1) Operate the WHINSEC for the professional education and training of military, law
enforcement, and civilian personnel of nations of the Western Hemisphere in accordance with
Federal laws and regulations and this Directive.

      (2) Provide timely and fully adequate administrative and resource support for
accomplishing the mission assigned to the WHINSEC.

       (3) Develop and implement a curriculum for the WHINSEC in accordance with section
343 of Reference (b) that:

             (a) Includes mandatory instruction for each student, for at least 8 hours, on human
rights, the rule of law, due process, civilian control of the military, and the role of the military in
a democratic society.

            (b) Supports the democratic principles set forth in Reference (d).

           (c) Is consistent with U.S. policy goals for the Western Hemisphere, the WHINSEC
mission, and regional plans of the U.S. Southern Command (USSOUTHCOM) and U.S.
Northern Command (USNORTHCOM).

            (d) Incorporates current U.S. doctrine.

           (e) Provides for guest instructors, guest speakers, and fellows programs as
appropriate.



Change 1, 08/23/2017                               2
                                                               DoDD 5111.12E, March 18, 2010



        (4) Establish a process for the selection of foreign personnel to attend the WHINSEC
that incorporates consultation with the Secretary of State.

        (5) Maintain a Board of Visitors according to section 343 of Reference (b) and consistent
with the Federal Advisory Committee Act, title 5, U.S.C., Appendix (Reference (e)) and DoD
Instruction (DoDI) 5105.04 (Reference (f)) in coordination with the USD(P) and the Deputy
Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense.

       (6) Prepare a report to Congress in coordination with the USD(P) and in consultation
with the Secretary of State, describing the activities of the WHINSEC during the preceding year.
The report shall include descriptions of the curriculum and significant curriculum changes, the
student participants, costs to operate and maintain the WHINSEC, a copy of the latest report of
the Board of Visitors, and other topics, as appropriate. This report shall be prepared,
coordinated, and submitted to Congress by March 15 of each year.

       (7) Establish, maintain, and preserve records that document the transaction of business of
the WHINSEC to provide evidence of the organization, functions, policies, procedures,
decisions, and activities in accordance with DoDI 5015.02 (Reference (g)).

   b. USD(P). The USD(P) shall:

       (1) Coordinate with the Secretary of the Army, as the DoD EA for the WHINSEC, on:

        (a) Matters pertaining to the WHINSEC, including the appointment of the
Commandant, establishment of a Board of Visitors, and revisions to the WHINSEC curriculum.

           (b) The preparation of the report to Congress required by section 343 of
Reference (b).

       (2) Ensure compliance with appropriate public disclosure and classified reporting
requirements.

   c. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:

     (1) As requested by the Secretary of the Army, as the DoD EA for the WHINSEC, or the
USD(P), coordinate on matters pertaining to the WHINSEC.

        (2) Consider, as required, any inputs from the Commanders of USSOUTHCOM and
USNORTHCOM as they pertain to the WHINSEC and provide military advice to assist in
resolving any conflicts pertaining to the WHINSEC.

  d. Commanders of USSOUTHCOM and USNORTHCOM. The Commanders of
USSOUTHCOM and USNORTHCOM shall:




Change 1, 08/23/2017                           3
                                                               DoDD 5111.12E, March 18, 2010


     (1) As requested by the Secretary of the Army, as the DoD EA for the WHINSEC, or the
USD(P), coordinate on matters pertaining to the WHINSEC.

        (2) As requested, provide the Secretary of the Army, as the DoD EA for the WHINSEC,
input on matters pertaining to the WHINSEC, while keeping the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff properly informed of all such communications.


6. RELATIONSHIPS. In the performance of assigned functions and responsibilities, the
Secretary of the Army shall use existing facilities and services of the Department of Defense and
other Federal agencies, when possible, to avoid duplication and to achieve an appropriate
balance among modernization, readiness, sustainability, efficiency, and economy.


7. AUTHORITIES. The Secretary of the Army, as the DoD EA for the WHINSEC, is delegated
the authorities and assigned the duties of the Secretary of Defense under section 343 of
Reference (b), except that the Secretary of Defense retains the authorities enumerated in section
343(e)(1)(C), (e)(4)(A), (e)(5), (e)(7), and (i) of Reference (b). The Secretary of the Army, as
the DoD EA for the WHINSEC, is further delegated the authority to:

   a. Arrange for and execute inter-Service support agreements, in accordance with DoDI
4000.19 (Reference (h)); memorandums of understanding with Federal agencies; and other
necessary arrangements, as required, to fulfill assigned responsibilities and functions.

   b. Obtain reports and information consistent with DoDI 8910.01 (Reference (i)), as
necessary, to carry out assigned responsibilities and functions.

    c. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry out
assigned responsibilities and functions, including the transmission of requests for advice and
assistance. Communications to the other Military Departments shall be transmitted through the
Secretary of the Military Department concerned, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law
or directed by the Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the
Commanders of the Combatant Commands, other than to the Commanders of USSOUTHCOM
and USNORTHCOM, on matters pertaining to the WHINSEC normally shall be transmitted
through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

    d. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the Legislative Branch,
members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments, as appropriate, in carrying
out assigned responsibilities. Communications with representatives of the Legislative Branch
shall be coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs or the Under
Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense, as
appropriate, and be consistent with the DoD Legislative Program, as appropriate.


8. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.



Change 1, 08/23/2017                            4
                                                         DoDD 5111.12E, March 18, 2010




9. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 1. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.

10. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosure
   References




Change 1, 08/23/2017                       5
                                                                           DoDD 5111.12E, March 18, 2010


                                                 ENCLOSURE

                                                 REFERENCES


(a)     DoD Directive 5111.12, “Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation,”
        June 17, 2002 (hereby canceled)
(b)     Sections 113 and 343 of title 10, United States Code
(c)     DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(d)     Charter of the Organization of American States, as amended 1
(e)     Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, title 5, United States Code, Appendix
(f)     DoD Instruction 5105.04, “Department of Defense Federal Advisory Committee
        Management Program,” August 6, 2007
(g)     DoD Instruction 5015.02, “DoD Records Management Program,” February 24, 2015
(h)     DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Support Agreements,” April 25, 2013
(i)     DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,” May 19, 2014




1
    Available at http://www.oas.org/en/sla/dil/inter_american_treaties_A-41_charter_OAS.asp.


Change 1, 08/23/2017                                     6                              ENCLOSURE
