                           Department of Defense
                              DIRECTIVE

                                                                              NUMBER 3160.01
                                                                                August 25, 2008
                                                             Incorporating Change 2, June 6, 2017

                                                                                           USD(P)

SUBJECT: Homeland Defense Activities Conducted by the National Guard

References: (a) Sections 502 and 901-908 of title 32, United States Code
            (b) Sections 115, 3013, 8013, and 10502 of title 10, United States Code
            (c) Section 1301 of title 31, United States Code
            (d) DoD Instruction 5545.02, “DoD Policy for Congressional Authorization and
                Appropriations Reporting Requirements,” December 19, 2008
            (e) DoD Directive 5105.77, “National Guard Bureau (NGB),” October 30, 2015


1. PURPOSE. This Directive implements sections 901-908 of Reference (a) according to the
authority in section 903 of Reference (a) to establish DoD policy and assign responsibilities for
employing the National Guard to conduct homeland defense activities.


2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive:

    a. Applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the
“DoD Components”).

    b. Does not supersede the responsibilities and authorities of the Secretary of the Army and
the Secretary of the Air Force according to Reference (b) nor the requirements for appropriations
according to Reference (c).

    c. Applies to the Governors and the Adjutants General of the States. Except as described in
this Directive with regard to homeland defense activities for which the Secretary of Defense
provides funds to a Governor to employ National Guard units or members in accordance with
section 902 of Reference (a), nothing in this Directive shall be construed as a limitation on the
authority of the Governor of a State to employ any unit of the National Guard of that State, when
such unit is not in Federal service, to perform functions authorized by the laws of the State
concerned.
                                                                 DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008



3. DEFINITIONS

   a. The terms “homeland defense activity” and “State” are defined in section 901 of
Reference (a).

   b. For the purposes of this Directive, unless the context herein indicates otherwise, the term
“National Guard” means the Army National Guard, the Air National Guard, the Army National
Guard of the United States, and the Air National Guard of the United States.


4. POLICY. It is DoD policy consistent with sections 901-908 of Reference (a) that:

   a. The Secretary of Defense may provide funds for a Governor to employ the National
Guard to conduct homeland defense activities that the Secretary determines to be necessary and
appropriate.

   b. The Governors of the States may request homeland defense activity funding for:

        (1) Deliberate, Planned Activities. Requests may be submitted prior to the anticipated
date of a planned homeland defense activity.

        (2) Exceptional Circumstances. Requests may be submitted during or after National
Guard execution of a homeland defense activity in a State active duty status. Governors shall
submit the request as quickly as circumstances permit allowing members to be subsequently
placed in full-time National Guard duty status (section 502(f) of Reference (a)).

    c. All duty performed according to this Directive shall be considered to be full-time National
Guard duty in accordance with section 502(f) of Reference (a). Members of the National Guard
performing full-time National Guard Duty in the Active Guard and Reserve Program may
support or execute homeland defense activities.

    d. The period for which members of the National Guard may perform duty according to this
Directive shall be limited to 180 days. The Governor of the State may, with the concurrence of
the Secretary of Defense, extend the period one time for an additional 90 days to meet
extraordinary circumstances.

    e. Members of the National Guard performing duty according to this Directive shall, in
addition to performing such duty, participate in the training required in section 502(a) of
Reference (a). Pay, allowances, and other benefits of members participating in the training shall
be the same as those to which they are entitled while performing duty according to this Directive;
members are not entitled to additional pay, allowances, or other benefits for participation in the
training. Members of the National Guard shall not participate simultaneously in the two separate
duty statuses set forth in sections 502(a) and 502(f) of Reference (a) within the same 24-hour
duty day.




Change 2, 06/06/2017                            2
                                                                   DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008


    f. To ensure that use of the National Guard for homeland defense activities does not degrade
the training and readiness of the National Guard, the following requirements shall apply in
determining the homeland defense activities the National Guard may perform.

        (1) The performance of the homeland defense activities shall not adversely affect the
quality of that training or otherwise interfere with the ability of the National Guard to perform its
other military functions.

        (2) The performance of the homeland defense activities shall not degrade the other
military skills of the National Guard.

    g. In the case of any homeland defense activity for which the Secretary of Defense
determines that participation of the National Guard of a State is necessary and appropriate, the
Secretary may provide funds to that State in an amount the Secretary determines is appropriate
for the following costs, from funds available to the Department for related purposes.

       (1) The pay, allowances, clothing, subsistence, gratuities, travel, and related expenses of
the National Guard of that State.

        (2) The operation and maintenance of the equipment and facilities of the National Guard
of that State.

       (3) The procurement of services and equipment and the leasing of equipment for the
National Guard of that State.


5. RESPONSIBILITIES: See Enclosure 1.


6. INFORMATION COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS. The Homeland Defense Activities,
referred to in paragraph 1d of Enclosure 1 of this directive, are submitted to Congress in
accordance with section 908 of Reference (a) and are coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Legislative Affairs in accordance with the procedures in DoD Instruction 5545.02
(Reference (d)).


7. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. Copies of this issuance are available on the
DoD Issuances Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


8. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 2. The changes to this issuance are administrative and update
organizational titles and references for accuracy.




Change 2, 06/06/2017                              3
                                                          DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008


9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective August 25, 2008.




Enclosures
   1. Responsibilities
   2. Sample Request for Funding




Change 2, 06/06/2017                       4
                                                                  DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008


                                         ENCLOSURE 1

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND DEFENSE AND GLOBAL
SECURITY (ASD(HS&GS)). The ASD(HD&GS), under the authority, direction, and control of
the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)), exercising overall supervision of the
homeland defense activities of the Department of Defense and performing other duties as
directed by the Secretary of Defense, shall:

    a. Serve as the Principal Staff Assistant and policy advisor to the Secretary of Defense and
the USD(P) with responsibility for homeland defense activities conducted by the National
Guard.

    b. In coordination with the DoD Components, advise and make recommendations to the
Secretary of Defense on the employment of and funding for National Guard forces when
performing homeland defense activities.

    c. Develop, coordinate, and issue policy guidance and oversee the implementation of policy
for homeland defense activities of the National Guard.

     d. In accordance with section 908 of Reference (a), after the end of any fiscal year during
which any assistance was provided or activities were carried out under chapter 9 of Reference
(a), prepare and submit to the congressional defense committees a report regarding any
assistance provided and activities carried out under chapter 9 of Reference (a) during that fiscal
year. The report shall be submitted not later than March 31 of the year following the end of the
fiscal year and shall include the following.

       (1) The numbers of members of the National Guard excluded pursuant to section
115(i)(13) of Reference (b) from being counted for the purpose of end strengths authorized
pursuant to section 115(a)(1) of Reference (b).

       (2) A description of the homeland defense activities conducted with funds provided in
accordance with Reference (a).

       (3) An accounting of the amount of the funds provided to each State.

         (4) A description of the effect of National Guard participation in homeland defense
activities on the military training and readiness of the National Guard.

    e. Review requests for funding for homeland defense activities against the following
criteria.

        (1) The request conforms to the statutory definition of a homeland defense activity in
section 901 of Reference (a).


Change 2, 06/06/2017                             5                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008



        (2) An actual or credible threat to the United States exists.

        (3) The Secretary of Defense determines that the homeland defense activity for the
protection of infrastructure or assets is critical to national security.

        (4) The request complies with Federal laws and regulations.

        (5) The activity is necessary and appropriate for National Guard participation.

        (6) Performance of the activity does not:

           (a) Adversely impact the training or readiness of a member or unit of the National
Guard to perform the military functions of the member or unit.

            (b) Degrade the military skills of the members of the National Guard performing the
activity.

            (c) Adversely impact the preparedness of the total National Guard force.

        (7) Funds are available and/or authorized in support of the objectives of paragraph
4.b.(2) of the basic document of this Directive.

   f. Advise the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of the Army, and the
Secretary of the Air Force of requests for National Guard homeland defense activities and solicit
Service feedback regarding the impact on readiness of such activity requests.


2. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)). The USD(I) shall
advise the ASD(HD&GS) on homeland defense threats to the United States.


3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)). The USD(P&R) shall:

    a. In coordination with the Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the Air Force, and the
Commander of the United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM), develop,
coordinate, and issue policy guidance and oversee the implementation of policy for the training
of the National Guard to ensure its readiness to execute homeland defense activities.

    b. Advise the ASD(HD&GS) on the necessity and appropriateness of National Guard
participation in homeland defense activities.

    c. Advise the Secretary of Defense on the impact of homeland defense activities on the
military training and readiness of the National Guard.




Change 2, 06/06/2017                              6                              ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008



4. GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (GC DoD). The GC DoD,
shall advise the ASD(HD&GS) on the consistency of requests for funding of National Guard
homeland defense activities with applicable laws, Presidential directives, Executive orders, and
DoD issuances.


5. SECRETARY OF THE ARMY AND SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. The Secretary
of the Army and the Secretary of the Air Force shall:

   a. Support National Guard homeland defense activities.

   b. Advise the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on requests for National Guard
homeland defense activities that affect the readiness of the National Guard.

    c. Coordinate with and support the Chief of the National Guard Bureau (NGB) in carrying
out his or her responsibilities with respect to National Guard homeland defense activities.

     d. Manage and provide sufficient resources in a timely manner for only those activities
approved by the Secretary of Defense specifically associated with sections 902-906 of Reference
(a).

   e. Provide for accounting and other procedures necessary to manage expenditures for
homeland defense activities according to sections 905 and 908 of Reference (a).

  f. Provide an accounting of the amount of the funds provided to each State to the
ASD(HD&GS) for inclusion in the annual report mandated by section 908 of Reference (a).


6. CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff shall review and assess requests from the Governors of the States for National Guard
homeland defense activities, recommend approval or disapproval, and advise the Secretary of
Defense on the following.

    a. Potential impacts on the operational deployment and employment of forces assigned to
the Combatant Commands.

    b. The necessity and appropriateness of National Guard participation in the requested
activities and the impact on readiness.

   c. The compatibility of the requested homeland defense activities with, and any conflicts
with, other Federal military operations.


7. COMMANDERS OF THE COMBATANT COMMANDS. The Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, through the Chairman of the Joints Chiefs of Staff, shall coordinate with


Change 2, 06/06/2017                           7                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008


the NGB to facilitate NGB synchronization of State homeland defense activity plans with the
appropriate Combatant Commanders to ensure National Guard activities funded in accordance
with this Directive do not conflict with ongoing Federal missions.


8. COMMANDERS OF THE GEOGRAPHIC COMBATANT COMMANDS. In addition to
performing the responsibility in section 7 of this enclosure, the Commanders of the Geographic
Combatant Commands having responsibility for the areas of operation (AORs) in which
requested homeland defense activities will occur shall advise the Secretary of Defense, through
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, regarding:

   a. The compatibility of the requested homeland defense activities with military operations
ongoing within their respective AORs.

   b. The necessity and appropriateness of the request from an operational perspective.


9. COMMANDER, USSOCOM. In addition to performing the responsibility in section 7 of
this enclosure, the Commander, USSOCOM, shall coordinate with the Secretary of the Army
and the Secretary of the Air Force to develop, coordinate, and issue policy guidance and oversee
the implementation of policy for the training of the National Guard to ensure its readiness to
execute homeland defense activities.


10. CHIEF, NGB. The Chief, NGB, shall:

   a. Pursuant to section 10502 of Reference (b), serve as a principal advisor to the Secretary of
Defense, through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, on matters involving non-
Federalized National Guard forces and on other matters as determined by the Secretary of
Defense; serve as the principal advisor to the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of the Air
Force on National Guard matters; and, as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, address matters
involving non-federalized National Guard forces in support of homeland defense and civil
support missions.

   b. Assist the State Adjutants General in supporting, synchronizing, and facilitating National
Guard homeland defense activities for which the Secretary of Defense has approved funding.

    c. Assist the State Adjutants General in assessing the impact(s) of requested homeland
defense activities on the military training and readiness of the National Guard.

   d. Assist and coordinate with the State Adjutants General in assessing the necessity and
appropriateness of National Guard participation in requested homeland defense activities.

    e. Coordinate with the State Adjutants General to ensure the required mission reports and
other information, as appropriate, are provided to the appropriate Combatant Commanders
through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.


Change 2, 06/06/2017                            8                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008



   f. Advise the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of the Air Force of Secretary of
Defense requests for National Guard homeland defense activities; maintain information from
executed homeland defense activities for Congressional and other reports.

    g. Advise the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary
of the Army, and the Secretary of the Air Force on operational matters, responsibilities, and
programs regarding National Guard homeland defense activities.

    h. Assist the Secretary of Defense in assessing the necessity and appropriateness of requests
for DoD funding for National Guard homeland defense activities.

    i. Serve as an advisor to the Combatant Commanders on National Guard matters pertaining
to homeland defense activity plans; support planning and coordination with the appropriate State
Adjutants General to ensure National Guard activities funded in accordance with this Directive
are integrated with the appropriate Combatant Command homeland defense activity plan and do
not conflict with ongoing Federal missions.

    j. In accordance with DoD Directive 5105.77 (Reference (e)), serve as the channel of
communication on all matters pertaining to National Guard homeland defense activities between
(1) the Secretary of Defense and the Heads of the DoD Components (including the Secretary of
the Army and the Secretary of the Air Force) and (2) the States. Direct liaison between the
entities in (1) and (2) should occur only in an emergency when time does not permit compliance
with this Directive. In each such instance, the Chief, NGB, should be informed of the
communication.

    k. Assist the State Adjutants General in fulfilling the responsibilities set forth in section 11
of this enclosure.


11. GOVERNORS OF THE STATES. The Governors of the States shall:

    a. Retain command and control of all National Guard forces within their respective States
that are executing homeland defense activities pursuant to sections 901-908 of Reference (a).

    b. Include the following in requests for funding assistance for the homeland defense
activities of the National Guard. (See sample letter of request at Enclosure 2.)

       (1) The specific intended homeland defense activities.

       (2) An explanation of why participation of National Guard units or members is
necessary and appropriate.

     (3) A certification that the activities will be conducted at a time when the units or
members to be involved are not in Federal service.



Change 2, 06/06/2017                              9                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                 DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008


    c. Submit requests for homeland defense activity funding as far in advance of planned
activities as possible, and for exceptional circumstances, as quickly as the circumstances permit.

    d. Coordinate with the NGB to facilitate NGB synchronization of State homeland defense
activity plans with the appropriate Combatant Commanders to ensure National Guard activities
funded in accordance with this Directive do not conflict with ongoing Federal missions.




Change 2, 06/06/2017                            10                                ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                      DoDD 3160.01, August 25, 2008


                                           ENCLOSURE 2

                               SAMPLE REQUEST FOR FUNDING


 All State requests shall be addressed to the Executive Secretary of the Department of Defense
 from the Governor of the State.

                               GOVERNOR OFFICIAL LETTERHEAD

                                                   Date
 Executive Secretary
 Office of the Secretary of Defense
 1030 Defense Pentagon
 Washington, DC 20310-1030

 Subject: Request for Homeland Defense Activity Funding

 Dear [enter name of current Executive Secretary]:

 1. In accordance with sections 901-908 of title 32, United States Code, request funding to
 execute the following homeland defense activities in the State of [enter State].

    a. [Specify the first type of homeland defense activity, anticipated length of time, unit(s)
    identified to execute it, and estimated number of personnel.]

     b. [Specify the second type of homeland defense activity, anticipated length of time, unit(s)
 identified to execute it, and estimated number of personnel. Enter additional subparagraphs for
 additional missions.]

 2. [Justify the need for each homeland defense activity identified above and provide assurance
 that State and/or local authorities are overwhelmed and/or do not have the capability for the
 activity.]

    a. [Provide a rationale for why the National Guard units(s) and personnel are necessary and
 appropriate; i.e., identify their unique capabilities.]

     b. [Clarify that the activity will not conflict with unit training or degrade unit readiness and
 that the units and personnel are not in Federal service.]
     c. [Provide a creditable threat and/or intelligence assessment pertaining to each activity.]

 3. I certify that this homeland defense activity will be conducted at a time when the National Guard
 units or members to be involved are not in Federal service.

 4. My point of contact for this request is [enter name, office, telephone number, and e-mail
 address].
                                        [enter signature block]



Change 2, 06/06/2017                               11                                 ENCLOSURE 2
