                            Department of Defense
                               DIRECTIVE

                                                                           NUMBER 5101.12E
                                                                                 January 9, 2015
                                                     Incorporating Change 3, September 19, 2019

                                                                                        USD(A&S)

SUBJECT:      DoD Executive Agent (EA) for Construction and Barrier Materiel

References: See Enclosure 1


1. PURPOSE. This directive:

    a. Reissues DoD Directive (DoDD) 5101.12 (Reference (a)) to establish policy and assign
responsibilities pursuant to section 113 of Title 10, United States Code (Reference (b)) for the
management of construction and barrier materiel (Class IV) commodity across the spectrum of
military operations.

   b. Designates the Director, Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) as the DoD EA for
Construction and Barrier Materiel in accordance with DoDD 5101.1 (Reference (c)).

   c. Identifies the roles and responsibilities of the DoD EA for Construction and Barrier
Materiel and his or her relationship to the Military Departments and other applicable agencies
worldwide.


2. APPLICABILITY. This directive applies to:

   a. OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this directive as the “DoD
Components”).

   b. All logistical functions for materiel support of construction and barrier materiel for the
Military Services.


3. POLICY. It is DoD policy that:
                                                               DoDD 5101.12E, January 9, 2015


   a. The supply and use of construction and barrier materiel is an integral part of the DoD’s
global engagement, force protection, and warfighting capabilities.

    b. The construction and barrier materiel acquisition and logistics program maintains a
consistent level of efficient and effective worldwide support throughout the full spectrum of
military operations.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Enclosure 2.


5. RELEASABILITY. Cleared for public release. This directive is available on the Directives
Division Website at http://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.


6. SUMMARY OF CHANGE 3. This change is administrative and updates references and
organizational symbols to reflect the reorganization of the Office of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, pursuant to the July 13, 2018 Deputy
Secretary of Defense Memorandum (Reference (d)).


7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This directive is effective January 9, 2015.




                                                 Robert O. Work
                                                 Deputy Secretary of Defense

Enclosures
   1. References
   2. Responsibilities
Glossary




Change 3, September 19, 2019                    2
                                                            DoDD 5101.12E, January 9, 2015


                                      ENCLOSURE 1

                                       REFERENCES


(a) DoD Directive 5101.12, “DoD Executive Agent (DoD EA) for Construction/Barrier
    Materiel,” July 16, 2005 (hereby cancelled)
(b) Section 113 of Title 10, United States Code
(c) DoD Directive 5101.1, “DoD Executive Agent,” September 3, 2002, as amended
(d) Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Establishment of the Office of the Under
    Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Office of the Under Secretary
    of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment,” July 13, 2018
(e) Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS) Subpart 208.70,
    April 19, 2011
(f) DoD Instruction 4140.01, “DoD Supply Chain Materiel Management Policy,”
    March 6, 2019
(g) DoD Instruction 3110.06, “War Reserve Materiel (WRM) Policy,”
    January 7, 2019




                                             3
Change 3, September 19,2019                                           ENCLOSURE 1
                                                               DoDD 5101.12E, January 9, 2015


                                         ENCLOSURE 2

                                      RESPONSIBILITIES


1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION AND SUSTAINMENT
(USD(A&S)). The USD(A&S) provides oversight and guidance for DoD construction and
barrier materiel (Class IV).


2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SUSTAINMENT (ASD(S)). Under the
authority, direction, and control of the USD(A&S), the ASD(S):

   a Oversees the construction and barrier materiel support activities of the DoD EA for
Construction and Barrier Materiel.

   b. Assesses DoD EA for Construction and Barrier Materiel responsibilities for continued
need, currency, and effectiveness.

   c. Coordinates with the DoD EA for Construction and Barrier Materiel to ensure:

        (1) All necessary action is taken and funding is obtained to ensure that construction and
barrier materiel support keeps pace with the development of operational plans and force structure
changes.

       (2) Development of logistics plans for construction and barrier materiel to support
operations in all environments.


3. DIRECTOR, DLA. Under the authority, direction, and control of the ASD(S), and in addition
to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure and in his or her capacity as the DoD EA for
Construction and Barrier Materiel, the Director, DLA:

   a Integrates a construction and barrier materiel acquisition and logistics program that
maintains a consistent level of efficient and effective worldwide support throughout the full
spectrum of military operations in accordance with subpart 208.70 of the Defense Federal
Acquisition Regulation Supplement and DoDI 4140.01 (References (e) and (f)).

   b. Maintains a separate program element to execute DoD EA for Construction and Barrier
Materiel responsibilities.

    c. Plans for, procures, manages, and supplies construction and barrier materiel required by
the DoD Components.




Change 3, September 19, 2019                    4                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5101.12E, January 9, 2015


    d. Participates in the development and implementation of a joint tool for planning and
consolidating construction and barrier materiel requirements, in coordination with the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS).

    e. Participates in the planning, development, and implementation of joint processes to
support total visibility of construction and barrier materiel requirements and assets throughout
the entire supply chain and to adopt new and emerging materials.

    f. Chairs the Joint Class IV Governance Board to coordinate and resolve construction and
barrier materiel-related issues.

   g. Maintains alliances, as necessary, with other strategic and business partners in support of
requirements.

    h. Provides management information and reports, as required, to customers and partners so
they can monitor and improve their overall operations.


4. DoD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

   a. Provide consolidated requirements data to the DoD EA for Construction and Barrier
Material regarding the types and quantities of construction and barrier materiel items for the full
spectrum of military operations.

    b. Provide visibility to the United States Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) of the
strategic and theater distribution requirements for Class IV materiel.

    c. Coordinate with the DoD EA for Construction and Barrier Material and USTRANSCOM
on requirements sourcing to assure materiel availability during peace and wartime to eliminate
duplication of effort.

   d. Develop, program, and coordinate the budget for construction and barrier materiel
support, including research and development, in support of the unified and specified
commanders’ operational plans.

    e. Maintain and protect war reserve stocks in accordance with DoDI 3110.06 (Reference
(g)).

   f. Reimburse the DoD EA for Construction and Barrier Materiel for goods and services
provided and mission transfers, where applicable.

    g. Assess the support provided by the DoD EA for Construction and Barrier Materiel for
effectiveness and the efficiency in meeting requirements. Make appropriate recommendations
for improvements to the DoD EA for Construction and Barrier Materiel, as needed.




Change 3, September 19, 2019                     5                                 ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                DoDD 5101.12E, January 9, 2015


   h. Designate a representative (flag or general officer or Senior Executive Service level
equivalent) to serve on the joint Class IV Governance Board.


5. CJCS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this enclosure, the CJCS:

   a. Ensures that the Combatant Commanders assess the adequacy of construction and barrier
materiel support for deployed forces.

   b. Develops appropriate joint publications, doctrine, and standards for the employment of
construction and barrier materiel.

   c. Maintains and modernizes a joint planning tool that supports the DoD EA for
Construction and Barrier Materiel.


6. COMBATANT COMMANDERS. In addition to the responsibilities in section 4 of this
enclosure, and through the CJCS, the Combatant Commanders:

    a. Coordinate with the DoD EA for Construction and Barrier Material and USTRANSCOM
on construction and barrier materiel support in the planning and execution of military operations.

    b. Determine the point of physical handoff and transfer of accountability and responsibility,
in coordination with the DoD EA for Construction and Barrier Material and the Military
Services.




Change 3, September 19, 2019                     6                                ENCLOSURE 2
                                                                 DoDD 5101.12E, January 9, 2015


                                           GLOSSARY

                        PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASD(S)              Assistant Secretary of Defense for Sustainment


CJCS                Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff


DLA                 Defense Logistics Agency
DoDD                DoD Directive
DoDI                DoD Instruction


EA                  Executive Agent


USD(A&S)   Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
USTRANSCOM United States Transportation Command


                                     PART II. DEFINITIONS

These terms and their definitions are for the purposes of this directive.

construction and barrier materiel (Class IV). As used in this directive, a supply category that
includes materials that support fortification, obstacle and barrier construction, and construction
materiel for base development and general engineering.

DoD EA. Defined in Reference (c).




Change 3, September 19, 2019                      7                                    GLOSSARY
