                             Department of Defense
                                      DIRECTIVE

                                                                             NUMBER 5105.55
                                                                               March 12, 2008

                                                                                          DA&M

SUBJECT: Defense Commissary Agency (DeCA)

References: (a) Title 10, United States Code
            (b) DoD Directive 5105.55, “Defense Commissary Agency (DeCA),”
                November 9, 1990 (hereby canceled)
            (c) DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
                Readiness (USD(P&R)),” October 17, 2006
            (d) Deputy Secretary of Defense memorandum, “Delegation of Authorities and
                Assignment of Responsibilities of the Secretary of Defense under Section 192
                and Chapter 147 of title 10, United States Code, Relating to the Defense
                Commissary and Exchange Systems,” August 25, 2006 (hereby canceled)
            (e) DoD Instruction 4000.19, “Interservice and Intragovernmental Support,”
                August 9, 1995
            (f) DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,”
                March 6, 2007


1. PURPOSE

Under the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense by sections 113, 191, 192, and 2481 of
Reference (a), this Directive:

    1.1. Reissues Reference (b) to update the mission, organization and management,
responsibilities and functions, relationships, and authorities of DeCA, under the Under Secretary
of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), consistent with Reference (c).

   1.2. Supersedes Reference (d).


2. APPLICABILITY

This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military
Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commands,
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the
                                                                DoDD 5105.55, March 12, 2008

DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities within the Department of Defense
(hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”).


3. MISSION

The mission of DeCA is to provide an efficient and effective worldwide system of commissaries
for the resale of groceries and related household items at reduced prices to members of the
uniformed services, retired members, dependents of such members, and other authorized patrons,
to enhance their quality of life and to support military readiness, recruitment, and retention.


4. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

The DeCA is established as a Defense Agency under the authority, direction, control, and overall
supervision of the USD(P&R). It shall consist of a Director and subordinate organizational
elements established by the Director. The Director shall report to the DeCA Board of Directors,
which is the commissary system governing board established pursuant to section 2485(c) of
Reference (a), and, through the Chair, be accountable to the USD(P&R) through the Principal
Deputy USD(P&R).


5. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS

   5.1. The Director, DeCA, shall:

       5.1.1. Organize, direct, and manage the day-to-day operations of DeCA and the
commissary system and all assigned resources; procure items for resale; and administer,
supervise, and control all programs and activities assigned to DeCA.

      5.1.2. Plan, program, budget, design, manage, and ensure the execution of the
commissary facilities construction, modification, and repair programs.

        5.1.3. Provide and operate DeCA facilities under standards consistent with those used for
commercial food stores, monitoring emerging industry trends consistent with quality of life
principles.

       5.1.4. Plan and direct use of commissary stocks to support mobilization and emergency
response, as required.

       5.1.5. Establish and administer a civilian career management program to include referral
services and development programs for commissary management personnel.

       5.1.6. Ensure that DeCA programs and activities are designed and managed to
continually improve standards of performance, economy, and efficiency, and demonstrate




                                                2
                                                                DoDD 5105.55, March 12, 2008

DeCA’s attention to the requirements of its organizational customers, both internal and external
to the Department of Defense.

        5.1.7. Designate an individual within DeCA, when a military commander has not been
designated, to perform necessary actions to provide facilities, physical security, maintenance,
logistics, and administrative support as required for effective operation of an individual
commissary store or other DeCA activity under inter-Service support and servicing agreements
consistent with DoD Instruction 4000.19 (Reference (e)). Such functions to be provided under
such agreements include, but are not limited to, those police powers expressly or inherently
granted military commanders, that are necessary to carry out the protection of defense personnel
and property.

     5.1.8. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Secretary of Defense, the
USD(P&R), or the Chair of the DeCA Board of Directors.

   5.2. The USD(P&R) shall:

       5.2.1. Appoint the Director, DeCA.

        5.2.2. Appoint the Chair and members of the DeCA Board of Directors according to
section 2485(c) of Reference (a).

       5.2.3. Establish policies and resources for administration of DeCA and its programs.

       5.2.4. Establish standards and issue further guidance for military commissary operations.

       5.2.5. Make arrangements for the Combatant Commanders to assume temporary
operational control of commissaries in wartime or periods of heightened alert, in coordination
with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

       5.2.6. Approve strategic plans and programs pertaining to DeCA.

       5.2.7. Approve establishment and disestablishment of commissaries.

       5.2.8. Approve the annual commissary construction program.

       5.2.9. Authorize transfer of appropriated funds, in coordination with the Under Secretary
of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense (USD(C)/CFO), to a
Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentality for the operation of a commissary store in accordance
with section 2485(b)(2) of Reference (a).

       5.2.10. Oversee the operations of the defense commissary system according to section
2481(c) of Reference (a).




                                                3
                                                                 DoDD 5105.55, March 12, 2008

    5.3. The USD(C)/CFO shall advise the USD(P&R) on accounting, budgeting, funding, cash
management, debt management, and pricing and surcharge policy for DeCA and coordinate on
transfer of appropriated funds according to section 2485(b)(2) of Reference (a).

   5.4. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

        5.4.1. Enter into such inter-Service support and servicing agreements with the Director,
DeCA or designee, to provide facilities, physical security, maintenance, logistics, and
administrative support as required for effective operation of the military commissary program as
agreed to by DeCA and cognizant DoD Component Commands under inter-Service support and
servicing agreements consistent with Reference (e).

       5.4.2. Provide the facilities, goods, and services agreed to under paragraph 5.4.1.

       5.4.3. Provide necessary representation at the proper level to staff the DeCA Board of
Directors.

        5.4.4. Include annual funding for an appropriate share of DeCA operating costs in the
Program Objectives Memorandum and the Budget Estimates Submission. Funds will be
transferred to the DeCA Working Capital Fund appropriation each year prior to submission of
the President’s Budget to Congress.


6. RELATIONSHIPS

   6.1. In the performance of assigned responsibilities and functions, the Director, DeCA, shall:

       6.1.1. Report to the DeCA Board of Directors and will be accountable to the USD(P&R)
through the Board.

       6.1.2. Use existing systems, facilities, and services in the Department of Defense and
other Federal agencies, when possible, to avoid duplication and to achieve maximum efficiency
and economy.

       6.1.3. Coordinate and exchange information with the OSD Principal Staff Assistants
(PSAs) and the Heads of the other DoD Components having collateral or related responsibilities
and functions.

    6.2. The OSD PSAs and the Heads of the other DoD Components shall provide assistance
and coordinate with the Director, DeCA on all matters under their purview related to the
authorities, responsibilities, and functions assigned in this Directive.




                                                4
                                                                 DoDD 5105.55, March 12, 2008

7. AUTHORITY

The Director, DeCA, is hereby delegated authority to:

    7.1. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry
out assigned responsibilities and functions, including the transmission of requests for advice and
assistance. Communications to the Military Departments shall be transmitted through the
Secretaries of the Military Departments, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law or
directed by the Secretary of Defense in other DoD Issuances. Communications to the
Commanders of the Combatant Commands normally shall be transmitted through the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

    7.2. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the Legislative
Branch, members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments, as appropriate, to
carry out assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with representatives of the
Legislative Branch shall be coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative
Affairs or the USD(C)/CFO, as appropriate, and be consistent with the DoD Legislative
Program.

    7.3. Prescribe procedures, standards, and practices for the Department of Defense governing
the execution of assigned responsibilities and functions as contained herein.

   7.4. Enter into agreements with the Military Departments or other Government entities, as
required for the effective performance of the military commissary program.

     7.5. Obtain reports and information, consistent with DoD Instruction 8910.01 (Reference
(f)), as necessary to carry out assigned responsibilities and functions.

   7.6. Exercise the operational and administrative authorities contained in Enclosure 1.


8. ADMINISTRATION

   8.1. DeCA programming, budgeting, funding, procuring, auditing, accounting, pricing, and
reporting activities shall be in accordance with established DoD policies and procedures.

   8.2. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall assign military personnel to DeCA
according to approved authorizations and established procedures for assignment to joint duty.


9. RELEASABILITY

UNLIMITED. This Directive is approved for public release. Copies may be obtained through
the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.




                                                5
                                               DoDD 5105.55, March 12, 2008

10. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Directive is effective immediately.




Enclosure – 1
   E1. Delegations of Authority




                                           6
                                                                  DoDD 5105.55, March 12, 2008

                                       E1. ENCLOSURE 1

                               DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY


Under the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to the authority, direction,
and control of the USD(P&R), and in accordance with DoD policies and Issuances, the Director,
DeCA, or in the absence of the Director, the person acting for the Director, is hereby delegated
authority as required in the administration and operation of DeCA to:

   E1.1. Exercise the powers vested in the Secretary of Defense by 5 U.S.C. 301, 302(b), 3101,
and 5101 on the employment, direction, and general administration of DeCA civilian personnel.

    E1.2. Fix pay for prevailing rate employees on the basis of rates established by the Wage
and Salary Division, Civilian Personnel Management Service, under the Federal Wage System as
defined by 5 U.S.C. and consistent with applicable OPM and DoD regulations.

    E1.3. Administer oaths of office incidental to entrance into the Executive Branch of the
Federal Government or any other oath required by law in connection with employment therein,
in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 2903, and designate, in writing, as may be necessary, officers and
employees of DeCA to perform this function.

   E1.4. Establish a DeCA Incentive Awards Board and authorize cash awards to, and incur
necessary expenses for, the honorary recognition of civilian employees of the Government
whose suggestions, inventions, superior accomplishments, or other personal efforts, including
special acts or services, benefit or affect the DeCA or its subordinate activities, in accordance
with 5 U.S.C. 4503, applicable OPM regulations, and DoD 1400.25-M, Subchapter 451.

    E1.5. Maintain an official seal and attest to the authenticity of official DeCA records under
the seal.

   E1.6. Perform the following functions in accordance with Executive Orders 10450, 12333,
and 12368; and DoD Directive 5200.2; as appropriate to:

       E1.6.1. Designate any position in DeCA as a “sensitive” position in accordance with
procedures prescribed in DoD 5200.2-R.

        E1.6.2. Authorize, in case of an emergency, the appointment of a person to a sensitive
position in DeCA for a limited period of time and for whom a full field investigation or other
appropriate investigation, including the National Agency Check, has not been completed.

      E1.6.3. Authorize the suspension, but not the termination, of the services of a DeCA
employee in the interest of national security.




                                             7                                     ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                   DoDD 5105.55, March 12, 2008

        E1.6.4. Initiate personnel security investigations and, if necessary in the interest of
national security, suspend security access to classified information for personnel assigned,
detailed to, or employed by DeCA. Any action under this paragraph shall be in accordance with
procedures prescribed in DoD 5200.2-R.

       E1.6.5. Grant interim Secret clearances for access to classified information when the
requirements of DoD 5200.2-R have been met.

   E1.7. Authorize and approve:

       E1.7.1. Travel for DeCA civilian employees in accordance with Joint Travel
Regulations, Volume 2.

       E1.7.2. Temporary duty travel for military personnel assigned or detailed to the DeCA in
accordance with Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1.

       E1.7.3. Invitational travel to non-DoD personnel whose consultative, advisory, or other
highly specialized technical services are required in a capacity that is directly related to, or in
connection with, DeCA activities, in accordance with Joint Travel Regulations, Volume 2.

      E1.7.4. Overtime work for DeCA civilian personnel in accordance with Subchapter V of
Chapter 55 of 5 U.S.C. and applicable OPM regulations.

    E1.8. Approve the expenditure of funds available for travel by military personnel assigned or
detailed to DeCA for expenses incidental to attendance at meetings of technical, scientific,
professional, or other similar organizations in such instances when the approval of the Secretary
of Defense, or designee, is required by 37 U.S.C. 412.

   E1.9. Develop, establish, and maintain an active and continuing Records Management
Program pursuant to 44 U.S.C. 3102 and DoD Directive 5015.2.

    E1.10. Authorize the publication of advertisements, notices, proposals, or other public
periodicals, as required for the effective administration and operation of DeCA, consistent with
44 U.S.C. 3702.

    E1.11. Establish and maintain, for the functions assigned, an appropriate publications system
for the promulgation of DoD Issuances, and reference documents, and changes thereto, pursuant
to the policies and procedures prescribed in DoD Instruction 5025.01.

    E1.12. Enter into support and service agreements with the Military Departments, other DoD
Components, or other Federal, State and Local Government agencies and private organizations,
for the effective performance of DeCA functions and responsibilities.




                                                 8                                 ENCLOSURE 1
                                                                  DoDD 5105.55, March 12, 2008

    E1.13. Enter into and administer contracts, directly or through a Military Department, a DoD
contract administration services component, or other Federal Agency, as appropriate, for
supplies, equipment, and services required to accomplish the mission of DeCA. To the extent
that any law or Executive Order specifically limits the exercise of such authority to persons at the
Secretarial level of a Military Department, such authority shall be exercised by the appropriate
Under Secretary or Assistant Secretary of Defense.

   E1.14. Approve waivers of indebtedness for DeCA employees in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
5584.

    E1.15. Establish and maintain appropriate property accounts for DeCA and appoint Boards
of Survey, approve reports of survey, relieve personal liability, and drop accountability for
DeCA property contained in the authorized property accounts that has been lost, damaged,
stolen, destroyed, or otherwise rendered unserviceable, in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations.

   E1.16. Issue the necessary security regulations for the protection of property and places
under the jurisdiction of the Director, DeCA, consistent with DoD Instruction 5200.08.

    E1.17. Lease property under the control of DeCA, under terms that will promote the national
defense or that will be in the public interest, pursuant to 10 U.S.C. 2667a.

   E1.18. The Director, DeCA, may redelegate these authorities, as appropriate, and in writing,
except as otherwise indicated in this enclosure, or as otherwise provided by law or regulation.




                                                 9                                 ENCLOSURE 1
