                            DOD INSTRUCTION 7730.66
        READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE FOR THE DEFENSE
                READINESS REPORTING SYSTEM

Originating Component:       Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness

Effective:                   December 10, 2024

Releasability:               Cleared for public release. Available on the Directives Division Website
                             at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD/.

Reissues and Cancels:        DoD Instruction 7730.66, “Guidance for the Defense Readiness Reporting
                             System (DRRS),” July 8, 2011

Incorporates and Cancels: Directive-type Memorandum 23-002, “Medical Capability Readiness
                          Reporting in the Defense Readiness Reporting System,” March 14, 2024

Approved by:                 Ashish S. Vazirani, Performing the Duties of the Under Secretary of
                             Defense for Personnel and Readiness


Purpose: In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5124.02 and Section 117 of
Title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.), this issuance:
• Establishes and implements readiness reporting policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides
guidance for conducting and submitting readiness reports into the Defense Readiness Reporting System
(DRRS).
•   Directs:
    o Standardized readiness reporting in DRRS.
   o Readiness reporting in DRRS to support global visibility of doctrinal organizations and
embedded capabilities for day-to-day operations and wartime planning.
    o The continuous review and identification of authoritative data resources within the DoD for
incorporation into DRRS.
                                                                                            DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Policy. ............................................................................................................................... 3
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES ......................................................................................................... 5
   2.1. Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)). ........................ 5
   2.2. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness (ASD(R)). ................................................ 5
   2.3. Director, Defense Health Agency (DHA). ........................................................................ 7
   2.4. USD(P). ............................................................................................................................. 7
   2.5. Principal Staff Assistants (PSAs)...................................................................................... 7
   2.6. Directors, CSAs. ............................................................................................................... 8
   2.7. Secretaries of the Military Departments. .......................................................................... 9
   2.8. Secretary of the Navy...................................................................................................... 11
   2.9. Chief, National Guard Bureau (NGB). ........................................................................... 11
   2.10. CJCS. ............................................................................................................................ 12
   2.11. CCDRs. ......................................................................................................................... 14
   2.12. Commander, USSOCOM. ............................................................................................ 15
   2.13. Commander, USCYBERCOM. .................................................................................... 16
   2.14. Commander, United States Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM). ........................... 16
SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS ............................................................. 17
   3.1. Unit Registration in DRRS. ............................................................................................ 17
   3.2. Activating, Updating, and Deactivating Units Registered in DRRS. ............................. 18
   3.3. Global Visibility in DRRS. ............................................................................................. 19
   3.4. Mission Registration and Management in DRRS. .......................................................... 19
   3.5. Mission and Capability Assessments in DRRS. ............................................................. 19
   3.6. Resource Readiness Reporting. ...................................................................................... 21
   3.7. Threat Informed Capability Readiness Reporting in DRRS. .......................................... 23
   3.8. Contested and Congested Cyberspace Readiness Reporting in DRRS. ......................... 23
   3.9. EMS Readiness Reporting in DRRS............................................................................... 24
   3.10. Medical Capability Readiness Reporting in DRRS. ..................................................... 24
   3.11. Military Department Installation Readiness Reporting in DRRS. ................................ 25
   3.12. Prepositioned War Reserve Materiel (PWRM) Readiness Reporting. ......................... 26
   3.13. Allied and Partner Forces Readiness Reporting. .......................................................... 27
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 28
   G.1. Acronyms. ...................................................................................................................... 28
   G.2. Definitions. ..................................................................................................................... 29
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 34




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY.

This issuance applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands (CCMDs), the Office of
Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field
Activities, and all other organizational entities within the DoD.


1.2. POLICY.

    a. Readiness reporting in DRRS provides the DoD with the ability to assess the joint forces’
capability and capacity to carry out the national defense strategy (NDS) and the national military
strategy (NMS) and the defense planning guidance (DPG) provided by the Secretary of Defense.

   b. Readiness reporting will:

        (1) Be standardized across the DoD and be of sufficient fidelity to provide a complete
picture to inform the assessment of strategic readiness, risk to mission, and resource-informed
development of military options to support the NDS, day-to-day operations, and wartime
planning.

       (2) Be conducted in DRRS at the level at which forces are employed.

        (3) Incorporate NDS-based threat analysis information into unit-level capability and
capacity assessments. Threat analysis must be presented at the appropriate classification level to
address the ability to accomplish missions in contested and congested cyberspace environments,
space, and the electromagnetic spectrum (EMS).

       (4) Be rapidly adaptable to changes in policy, planning guidance, and informational
needs of the DoD.

       (5) Incorporate and monitor authoritative data sources to improve report accuracy,
timeliness, and data quality. This includes the development and enhancement of information
technology systems to improve automation and reduce data entry workload.

        (6) Integrate with other DoD initiatives (e.g., training, joint planning and execution,
global force management (GFM), Joint Planning and Execution System, Combined Joint All
Domain Command and Control, the DoD EMS Superiority Strategy (EMS3), enterprise force
structure (EFS) compliant with the GFM Data Initiative (GFM DI), advanced analytics), to
enable a comprehensive view of readiness information for coordination, integration, analysis,
and assessment of capabilities, deficiencies, vulnerabilities, and resource status.

        (7) Incorporate munitions data, pre-positioned stock data including individual personal
protection equipment, medical capability and capacity data, deploy or mobilization to dwell



SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                           3
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


ratios, and military installation and supporting infrastructure mission readiness assessments and
capacity data.

       (8) Provide capability assessments in a common language of mission essential tasks
(METs) via conditions and standards essential to the completion of designed and assigned
missions. The approved Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) facilitates standardization.

       (9) Provided the ability to complete resource, mission, and task assessments within
24 hours of a significant event, when directed, or each calendar month as a minimum.

        (10) Provide for the Military Services and agencies to collect supplemental data to aid in
the calculation of readiness metrics, aid in force generation, and inform resource allocation that
does not detract from the primary purpose of readiness reporting. All supplemental data
collected is available for analysis as part of the total DRRS database.

         (11) Account for the integration of, and contributions from, allied and partner elements
to joint mission essential tasks (JMETs) through the monitoring and evaluation of combined
exercises.

       (12) Identify force elements with comparable capabilities both within a single Military
Service and across all Military Services to support joint force analysis and capability sourcing
analysis.

    c. Readiness reporting must support the data needs for decision-advantage analytic methods
designed to inform the strategic, operational and force management decisions of senior leaders as
well as the DoD’s business processes.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                             4
                                                              DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


                           SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS
(USD(P&R)).

In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.5., the USD(P&R):

   a. Oversees readiness reporting policy development and DRRS management to conduct
comprehensive strategic and operational readiness reporting by:

      (1) Building upon the readiness assessment processes and tools in use throughout the
DoD to improve data accuracy, timeliness, completeness, responsiveness of readiness reporting.

       (2) In coordination with the CJCS, maintaining the DRRS governance structure.

       (3) Maintaining the comprehensive listing of DRRS data requirements and sources in
accordance with DoD Instruction (DoDI) 8320.02.

       (4) Coordinating required updates to DRRS within the DRRS governance process.

   b. Manages the DRRS data exchange to ensure that it documents readiness data to support:

       (1) GFM.

        (2) The missions being considered, developed, or undertaken by the DoD in furtherance
of the guidance in the NDS with proactive and scalable joint force employment.

    c. In coordination with the Directors, Combat Support Agencies (CSAs), the Secretaries of
the Military Departments and the CJCS, creates and maintains force elements with the DRRS
Group Management module.

    d. In coordination with the CJCS and the Combatant Commanders (CCDRs), develops a
DRRS-compatible system for the registration of selected allied and partner forces necessary to
support strategic readiness assessments and provide a comprehensive view of combined force
readiness and capabilities.


2.2. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR READINESS (ASD(R)).

Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), the ASD(R):

   a. Develops and recommends policy and plans for the continued development, operation,
and modernization of DRRS in support of NDS objectives.

   b. Oversees DRRS actions in accordance with DoDD 7730.65, to ensure the accuracy and
completeness of reporting, compliance with information and data timeliness, and the effective
and efficient use of modern practices and technologies.



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                      5
                                                             DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


   c. In coordination with the Director, Joint Staff:

       (1) Oversees governance structures to manage the continued development, operation,
and modernization of the DRRS information technology system and the development of
readiness reporting policy requirements.

       (2) Establishes standard data exchange and data sharing requirements for DRRS.

     (3) Standardizes Universal Joint Tasks (UJTs) in accordance with CJCS Manual
(CJCSM) 3500.04 to support:

           (a) JMET development and assessments across all Joint Capability Areas,
warfighting functions, domains, and the EMS.

           (b) The assessment of the missions assigned through the:

              1. NDS.

              2. NMS.

             3. Joint Strategic Campaign Plan (JSCP) in accordance with CJCS Instruction
(CJCSI) 3110.01.

              4. Unified Command Plan (UCP).

              5. DoD EMS3.

              6. Other policy direction.

      (4) Develops processes, procedures, and metrics in accordance with Paragraph 1.2.d.(2)
of DoDD 7730.65 to:

            (a) Enable Military Service Headquarters assessments of their Military Department’s
Title 10, U.S.C. functions (i.e., organize, train, and equip forces) in DRRS.

           (b) Support NDS strategic readiness assessments and defense objectives.

       (5) In accordance with Paragraph 1.2.d. of DoDD 7730.65 develops readiness reporting
standards to assess the joint forces’ ability to execute designed and assigned missions in:

           (a) Contested and congested cyberspace environments.

           (b) EMS.

           (c) Information environments.

           (d) Space.

           (e) Escalating threat environments.


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                    6
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


        (6) Standardizes the process to assess and project the strategic readiness impacts on the
joint force resulting from the exercise of the Foreign Assistance Act (Public Law 87-195,
Chapter 32 of Title 22, U.S.C.), Section 506, Presidential Drawdown Authority (Section 2318 of
Title 22, U.S.C.).

    d. Develops comprehensive and standardized DoD DRRS system training, including training
on newly developed functionality of the system, to support strategic, operational, and tactical-
level readiness reporting and assessments.

    e. Develops a DRRS compatible readiness system, in coordination with the Under Secretary
of Defense for Policy USD(P), the CJCS, and the CCDRs, to address the capabilities and
resources of allied and partner nations.


2.3. DIRECTOR, DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY (DHA).

Under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(P&R), through the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Health Affairs, the Director, DHA:

   a. Develops standardized readiness reporting requirements to improve the visibility,
capability, and capacity of medical supplies (class VIII) and the medical logistics support
capability to the joint force as described in Paragraph 3.10.

  b. In coordination with the CJCS, incorporates DHA military treatment facilities that support
CCMD plans with definitive health care (e.g., Role IV) capabilities into DRRS.


2.4. USD(P).

In coordination with the USD(P&R) and the CJCS and in addition to the responsibilities in
Paragraph 2.5., the USD(P) develops readiness reporting policy and procedures in a
DRRS-compatible system to address the capabilities and resources of allied and partner nations.


2.5. PRINCIPAL STAFF ASSISTANTS (PSAS).

The PSAs:

   a. In coordination with the USD(P&R), develop standardized readiness reporting
requirements to improve joint force capability readiness assessments within the scope of their
component responsibilities.

    b. Oversee component mission readiness reports for organizations that fall within the scope
of their responsibilities.

   c. In coordination with the CJCS, oversee UJT and Joint Mission Essential Task List
(JMETL) development for the CSAs that fall within the scope of their responsibilities.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       7
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


    d. Identify and recommend Component authoritative data sources for incorporation into
DRRS to improve capability and capacity assessments to inform and enable strategic readiness
data analysis within senior leader decision advantage support tools.


2.6. DIRECTORS, CSAs.

Under the authority, direction, and control of their respective PSA, the Directors, CSAs:

   a. Report capability readiness into DRRS to support CCDR missions.

    b. Participate in respective readiness governance forums to require CSA readiness reporting
in DRRS meets guidance and policy.

    c. In coordination with the CJCS to develop the UJT, direct that CSA missions and
requirements are incorporated into the UJTL to support respective JMETL construct and
readiness assessments in DRRS as described in Paragraph 3.5.b.(1)-(3).

   d. Develop CSA-level METs to enable military installation and supporting infrastructure to
conduct and report capability assessments for core and assigned missions.

   e. Comply with the procedures in Section 3 to require all CSA organizations/units/elements
required for the support of mission accomplishment of a DoD Component are registered in
DRRS and report readiness.

    f. Designate an office of primary responsibility to manage the functionality of their agency’s
group management module in DRRS, as described in Paragraph 3.1.e., to inform and enable
strategic readiness data analysis within senior leader decision advantage support tools.

    g. Document and manage the full OSD EFS in a GFM DI organization server (OS) for data
exchange with DRRS to support execution of the NDS, CCMD operational and contingency
plans, GFM, and capability assessment requirements.

    h. Direct use of the procedures outlined in Section 3 to document non-OS EFS
organizations, ad hoc or provisional units, and force elements required to report their readiness in
DRRS to support contingency operations. These procedures will be used to implement changes
to basic unit identification elements to support execution of proactive and scalable employment
of the joint force, global force visibility for GFM day-to-day operations, and wartime planning.

    i. Direct reported capability and resource readiness in DRRS to be updated with any change
in the overall resource or mission readiness status of a CSA unit or organization, or element of a
CSA unit or organization, within 24-hours of the event necessitating the change. This
requirement is applicable to DRRS registered units, military installations, and institutional
organizations. Reported changes are required for an operational incident, natural disaster,
climate, or extreme weather event affecting the ability of the organization, unit, or element to
deploy or execute its designed or assigned missions.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                          8
                                                                DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


  j. Direct the participation in and use of DRRS assessment data as a required input into the
CSA Review Team assessments completed in accordance with CJCSI 3460.01.


2.7. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS.

The Secretaries of the Military Departments:

    a. Develop their component tasks with specific standards and conditions, to enable capability
assessment of an organization/unit/element’s designed and assigned missions through the
designation of METs, supporting tasks, and subordinate unit tasks, as needed.

    b. Develop their component tasks with specific standards and conditions to enable military
installation and supporting infrastructure to conduct and report capability assessments for core
and assigned missions through the designation of METs, supporting tasks, and subordinate unit
tasks.

    c. Require units scheduled for deployment report their readiness in DRRS before (and
during) assigned missions (e.g., deployment, named operations, declared contingencies, state
missions, employment in place).

   d. To improve the visibility and comprehensive understanding of the readiness of medical
capacity and capability, as integral part of operational readiness as described in Paragraph 3.9:

         (1) Direct their component OS to reflect operational, ad hoc, provisional, and
institutional medical units required to provide forward resuscitative care, en route care, patient
movement, theater hospitalization, or definitive care capabilities as outlined in Joint Publication
(JP) 4-02.

     (2) Direct their components to register their operational and institutional medical units in
DRRS and report their overall readiness to execute their core medical mission.

        (3) Direct all non-medical units possessing a Role 2 forward resuscitative care capability
to assess and report their organic, embedded, medical capabilities in DRRS as part of their core
mission.

      (4) In coordination with the CJCS, direct the use of standardized UJTs for use by non-
medical units possessing a Role 2 forward resuscitative care capability to assess their organic,
embedded, medical capability.

    e. Direct development of their component METs to enable air mobility units, sealift units,
special operations forces (SOF), and supporting infrastructure to conduct and report capability
assessments for core and assigned missions.

    f. In coordination with the ASD(R), revise their component METs to enable units to measure
their ability to conduct both core and assigned missions in contested and congested cyberspace.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                           9
                                                                DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


    g. Document and manage the full EFS in their component OS for data exchange with DRRS
to support execution of the NDS, CCMD operational and contingency plans, GFM, and
capability requirements.

    h. Designate an office of primary responsibility to manage the functionality of their Military
Department’s group management modules in DRRS, as described in Paragraph 3.1.e., to support
force generation models and provide global force visibility in support of campaigning and
operations.

    i. Direct use of the procedures to document non-OS EFS organizations, ad hoc or provisional
units, and force elements required to report readiness in DRRS to support contingency operations
in accordance with Section 3 of this issuance and Paragraph 2.6. of DoDD 7730.65. These
procedures will be used to implement changes to basic unit identification elements to enable
global force visibility to support joint planning and execution.

    j. Direct reported capability and resource readiness in DRRS to be updated with any change
in the overall resource or mission readiness status of a unit, or element of a unit, within 24-hours
of the event necessitating the change.

   k. Submit operational unit location changes within 24-hours to DRRS to facilitate National
Leadership Command Capability global visibility of the joint force for joint planning and
execution.

   l. Ensure their Military Department complies with readiness reporting standardization
requirements issued by the CJCS.

    m. In coordination with the USD(P&R), direct the submission, maintenance, governance,
and automation of forecasted supply of ready forces aligned with the Future Years Defense Plan
to establish the baseline for the readiness decision impact model decision support analytical
tools.

    n. Participate in respective readiness governance forums to ensure that their component
readiness reporting in DRRS meets guidance and policy.

    o. Continuously review and identify their Military Department’s authoritative data sources
for incorporation into DRRS. The purpose is to improve global visibility, capability and capacity
assessments to inform and enable strategic readiness data analysis within senior leader decision
advantage support tools.

   p. Review and update their component’s task list, METs, supporting tasks, subordinate tasks,
and corresponding standards and conditions, as required, but at least annually in coordination
with the:

       (1) USD(P&R).

       (2) CJCS.

       (3) CCDRs.


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       10
                                                                DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


   q. Submit recommended changes to readiness reporting policies via the DRRS governance
process.

    r. In coordination with the USD(P&R) and the CJCS, develop and provide standardized
DRRS training, including newly developed DRRS system functionality, to all their component
echelons that use or report in DRRS, United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM),
and United States Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM) to support strategic, operational, and
tactical-level readiness reporting.


2.8. SECRETARY OF THE NAVY.

In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.7., the Secretary of the Navy:

    a. Develops the readiness reporting requirements in the DRRS to address the capabilities and
resources of the U.S. Coast Guard in support of the NMS and GFM.

   b. Submits operational unit location changes within 24-hours to the DRRS to facilitate
National Leadership Command Capability global visibility of the joint force for joint planning
and execution and coordinates with the CJCS, USD(P) and USD(P&R) for units that are
underway or embarked.


2.9. CHIEF, NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU (NGB).

The Chief, NGB:

    a. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Army and Air Force, Directors of the Army and
Air National Guard, State Adjutant Generals, and the Commander, USSOCOM, designate
Title 32, U.S.C. and State missions that are included in National Guard reporting units’ readiness
assessments.

    b. Directs National Guard reporting units to develop METs, to include conditions and
standards, for designated Title 32, U.S.C., and State missions to include named operations in
support of Homeland Defense and Defense Support of Civil Authorities, CCMD assigned
missions and operations in support of USSOCOM activities when a unit is explicitly directed or
potentially directed.

   c. In coordination with the USD(P&R) and the CJCS, registers designated Title 32, U.S.C.
and State missions in the DRRS in accordance with Section 3.

  d. Submits readiness reporting change recommendations via the Executive Readiness
Management Group (ERMG).

   e. Participates in respective readiness governance forums to ensure that NGB readiness
reporting requirements are addressed and conform to policy.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                      11
                                                                 DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


    f. In coordination with the USD(P&R), the CJCS, the Secretaries of the Military
Departments, and the Commander, USSOCOM, develops and provides standardized DRRS
training to all NGB echelons that use or report in DRRS, including newly developed
functionality, to support strategic, operational, tactical-level, and Title 32, U.S.C. and State
readiness reporting.

    g. Identifies and recommends NGB authoritative data sources for incorporation into DRRS
to improve capability and capacity assessments to inform and enable strategic readiness data
analysis within senior leader decision advantage support tools.


2.10. CJCS.

The CJCS:

  a. In coordination with the USD(P&R), the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the
CCDRs, and the Directors, CSAs:

       (1) Develops standardized methods, metrics, and calculations used to report resource
assessments in DRRS for the Military Services, CCMDs, and CSAs, as described in
Paragraph 3.6.

       (2) Develops standardized methods, metrics, outputs, and conditions used in reporting
capability (mission and MET) assessments in DRRS for the Military Services, the CCMDs, and
the CSAs.

       (3) Directs the UJTL to contain appropriate tasks to allow the development of
standardized JMETs to enable the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the CCDRs, and the
Directors, CSAs to assess operational capability for both designed and assigned missions in
contested and congested cyberspace as described in Paragraph 3.8.c.

        (4) Develops and publishes policy and procedures for conducting unit/force element and
joint force readiness reporting, assessments, and reviews in DRRS in support of standardized
training and readiness reporting.

   b. In coordination with the USD(P&R), the CCDRs, and the Directors, CSAs:

       (1) Develops and standardizes mission assessment methodology used in DRRS.

       (2) Develops and publishes a JMETL development handbook.

       (3) Identifies and recommends authoritative data sources for incorporation into DRRS to
improve capability and capacity assessments to inform and enable strategic readiness data
analysis within senior leader decision advantage support tools.

   c. In coordination with the USD(P&R), the Secretaries of the Military Departments, and the
Directors, CSAs, develops MET/mission essential task list (METL) construct to support DRRS




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        12
                                                                 DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


Military Service headquarter-level assessments in the DRRS of Military Service functions
required to support NMS and NDS objectives.

   d. Directs readiness reporting for all units scheduled for deployment, in support of an
operation, GFM or a designated contingency operation and reports their readiness in DRRS
before deployment as well as directing periodic verifications of Military Service and unit
reported readiness to ensure compliance with readiness reporting guidance.

   e. Directs development and provides implementation guidance to the Military Services,
CCMDs, and the CSAs to support the electronic documentation of EFS in their respective OS in
accordance with DoDI 8260.03.

    f. Directs CCMDs to develop JMETLs using JMETL development doctrine for each JSCP
directed mission to support capability assessments against threats identified in the NDS.

    g. Develops readiness reporting policy and procedures in DRRS to account for global
visibility of Military Service forces embarked on or assigned to allied and partner nation forces.

   h. Manages the missions that are registered and assessed in DRRS in accordance with
Paragraph 3.4.

    i. Assigns a co-chair for the ERMG to oversee readiness reporting policy in support of
strategic readiness and decision advantage requirements in accordance with Paragraph 2.1.a.(2).

   j. Participates in readiness governance forums to ensure readiness reporting in DRRS meets
guidance and policy to execute the NDS, the NMS, and other national defense objectives.

    k. Institutionalizes standardized DRRS training program including newly developed
functionality, to all Military Service echelons to support strategic, operational, and tactical-level
readiness reporting.

    l. In coordination with the Secretaries of the Military Departments, develops, employs, and
sustains standardized UJTs for use by non-medical units possessing a Role 2 forward
resuscitative capability to assess their organic, embedded medical capability as part of their core
and assigned missions.

    m. Directs Chairman’s controlled activities to integrate unique topics into DRRS to provide
a more comprehensive assessment of the readiness of CCMDs. Chairman’s controlled activities
are specialized organizations designed to address specific areas of interest in support of the Joint
Staff and CCMDs.

        (1) Joint Requirements Office - Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear
Defense (JS J8): Defines the required system interoperability and operational architecture and
validates the development of joint chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN)
defense capabilities through both simulation and technology demonstrations.

       (2) Joint Center for International Security Force Assistance” (JS J7): Institutionalizes
lessons and best practices from security force assistance operations to prepare Military Services


SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        13
                                                              DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


more effectively to support sustainable development of capability and capacity of foreign
security forces and supporting institutions.

         (3) Joint Information Operations Warfare Center (JS J3): Improves the DoD ability to
meet CCMD information-related requirements, improves development of information-related
capabilities, and ensures operational integration and coherence across CCMDs and other DoD
activities.

        (4) Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JS J7): Provides strategic direction, oversight,
operational support, analysis, capability development, training, education, and technology
integration to enable commanders, forces, and individuals to prevent, prepare for and respond to
isolating events.


2.11. CCDRS.

Through the CJCS, the CCDRs:

   a. In coordination with the USD(P&R), develop and standardize DRRS assessments to
support NDS and NMS strategic assessments and decision advantage.

    b. Develop joint force JMETLs with standardized conditions and standards to support
strategic readiness assessments of the missions assigned by the Secretary of Defense. Report
readiness to execute assigned missions and tasks within DRRS.

   c. Incorporate intelligence-based threat assessments and address all applicable contested and
congested cyberspace conditions into plans to inform CCMD, Service Component Command,
and CSA mission assessments.

  d. Participate in readiness governance forums to ensure that CCMD, Service Component
Command, and CSA readiness reporting in DRRS meets guidance and policy.

    e. In coordination with the USD(P&R) and the CJCS, develop and provide standardized
DRRS training to CCMD personnel, Service Component Commands, assigned forces, and CSAs
including newly developed functionality, to support strategic and operational readiness reporting.

   f. Identify and recommend CCMD authoritative data sources for incorporation into DRRS to
improve capability and capacity assessments that inform and enable strategic readiness data
analysis within senior leader decision advantage support tools.

   g. Submit readiness reporting change recommendations via the ERMG.

    h. Develop a common DRRS compatible framework and standards to assess allied and
partner readiness defined in Paragraph 3.12.

     i. Require the appropriate personnel to input and maintain DRRS compatible data by specific
allied or partner nation within their respective areas of responsibility to support strategic




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                     14
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


readiness assessments and provide a comprehensive view of combined force readiness and
capabilities.

   j. Integrate allied and partner DRRS compatible data into strategic readiness assessments and
combined force readiness evaluations.

   k. In coordination with the CJCS and the Secretaries of the Military Departments, ensure all
CCDR assigned forces are correctly registered in Military Service and Joint OS for data
exchange with DRRS to support execution of the GFM allocation plan, directed readiness tables,
and to support CCMD operational and contingency plan force and capability requirements as
described in Paragraph 3.5.b.(1)-(3).

  l. Report the ability of CCMDs with a physical area of responsibility to execute the assigned
JMETL for theater campaign plans and other assigned missions.

   m. Determine critical dependencies on products and services by Military Service elements
and establish command linkages in DRRS for such products and services.

   n. During MET development, select the UJT that best aligns and assists with Military
Service-level tasks, as needed, and tailored to specific mission and command requirements.

   o. In coordination with the CJCS, propose changes to the UJTL through the change request
process when they are unable to adapt an existing UJT to a command MET.


2.12. COMMANDER, USSOCOM.

In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.11., the Commander, USSOCOM:

   a. Directs SOF echelon II and III commands, active, reserve, and national guard SOF
elements, to develop METLs with realistic conditions and measurable standards in support of
USSOCOM mission requirements, force management responsibilities, and the functions
described in Paragraph 2.9. for national guard force elements.

    b. Develops and monitors task and resources metrics to measure readiness to accomplish
core and directed missions.

   c. Identifies all authoritative data sources that support readiness analysis of resources, GFM,
and adaptive planning.

    d. Identifies all force elements within assigned SOFs that utilize METLs to assess and report
on core mission, activities, and assigned operations and major plans. All force elements and
organizations with designed responsibilities will develop METs for each plan as directed by
USSOCOM.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                     15
                                                              DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


2.13. COMMANDER, USCYBERCOM.

In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.11., the Commander, USCYBERCOM:

   a. Develop and monitor common METL metrics to measure readiness to accomplish core
and directed missions for cyberspace operations force elements.

   b. Identify all authoritative data sources that support readiness analysis of resources, GFM,
and adaptive planning.


2.14. COMMANDER, UNITED STATES STRATEGIC COMMAND (USSTRATCOM).

In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.11., the USSTRATCOM:

    a. As the Secretary of Defense assigned electromagnetic spectrum enterprise operational
lead for Joint Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations (JEMSO) and Electromagnetic Spectrum
Operations (EMSO), USSTRATCOM’s Joint Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations Center in
coordination with the Military Services and CCMDs uses JEMSO/EMSO-relevant UJTs derived
from the UJTL, standards and associated JMETS for readiness reporting.

    b. Assess and certify their forces using JEMSO/EMSO-relevant UJTs for operations in the
electromagnetic operational environment (EMOE).

   c. Develops and monitors common METL metrics to measure readiness to accomplish core
and assigned missions for JEMSO.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                    16
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


        SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS

3.1. UNIT REGISTRATION IN DRRS.

    a. DRRS unit registration enables the DoD’s global visibility requirement for unit
identification and readiness reporting at an organizational level at which forces are designed to
be employed.

         (1) This registration function supports execution of global command and control
activities for day-to-day operations, wartime planning, and proactive and scalable employment of
the joint force to meet the threats outlined in the NDS.

        (2) The Military Services, the CCMDs, the CSAs, and other organizations require that all
force elements or capabilities identified as assigned, allocated, in apportionment tables, and
directed readiness tables are registered and report readiness in DRRS in support of the DoD’s
global visibility and proactive and scalable employment construct requirement.

    b. The DoD’s GFM DI supports the global visibility requirement to standardize force
structure representation, making it visible, accessible, and comprehensible across the DoD.

        (1) As part of the GFM DI, OSD, Joint Staff, Military Services, and the defense
intelligence agencies developed respective OSs to implement the organizational and force
structure construct in accordance with DoDI 8260.03.

       (2) This organizational force structure construct implementation provided a means to
capture EFS data that is authoritative, timely, and high resolution in its depiction of modular
operational capabilities to support GFM and the scalable employment of the joint force.

    c. The DRRS unit registration process is accomplished through both the input of EFS data
directly from the OS and by augmenting it with additional data elements required by
CJCSM 3150.02.

       (1) The OS EFS data contains unique unit identification codes, basic identity data
elements, and unique organizational identifiers, unique organizational identifier long and
abbreviated names, unit type codes, EFS-specific unique identifiers, and other attributes for each
unit which are key enablers supporting the registration process.

       (2) These EFS data elements are developed and maintained by OS owners in compliance
with Joint Staff GFM DI data standard. The development and maintenance of any non-EFS data
elements required by CJCSM 3150.02 must be accomplished directly in DRRS.

        (3) Once registered, individual units accomplish readiness reporting in DRRS based on
their unique unit identification code or unique organizational identifiers.

       (4) Additional data elements required for registration enable grouping of like units and
capabilities and capturing changing command relationships while maintaining traceability and
common unique unit identification code or unique organizational identifiers.


SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                     17
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


    d. In some cases, unit registration of non-EFS units (e.g., lowest employable entities,
provisional units, or joint task forces) is required to support operational readiness reporting,
GFM, and global visibility requirements. This non-EFS registration may be accomplished
directly in DRRS using the required data elements in accordance with CJCSI 3401.02 and as
modified by the Secretary of the Military Department discretion granted in Paragraph 2.6.b. of
DoDD 7730.65.

   e. To support global visibility, the Office of the USD(P&R) creates and maintains, in
coordination with the Military Services, the Joint Staff, and the CSAs, force elements with the
DRRS Group Management module.

       (1) A force element can be a group of entities or units or a group of force entities.

       (2) These force element groups support both readiness analysis and GFM requirements
with authoritative information underpinned by metadata information requirements in accordance
with DoDIs 8320.02 and 8260.03.

    f. In many cases the lowest employable entity is a subordinate element of a registered,
readiness reporting unit.

        (1) The precise level of force employment required for such identification and reporting
will be determined by each Military Department in coordination with the ASD(R) and the CJCS.

       (2) These entities may also be too small for a Military Service to design formal mission
capability documentation. These types of entities are often key enablers to a task organized
capability.

       (3) If the entity does not possess formal mission and MET document, it will provide a
resource assessment only. To capture readiness, they must be registered in DRRS, but their
readiness may be provided by the parent readiness reporting unit and parsed out in DRRS to the
associated entity for display and analysis.


3.2. ACTIVATING, UPDATING, AND DEACTIVATING UNITS REGISTERED IN
DRRS.

   a. Military Service force additions or reductions will be closely managed and expeditiously
executed in DRRS due to their impact on global visibility in support of GFM day-to-day and
wartime planning actions.

   b. Unit registration in DRRS will be executed within 7 calendar days of unit activation or
change to its basic identity data elements.

   c. Unit(s) no longer considered part of the EFS or needed in support of global visibility for
GFM, will be deactivated in DRRS within 7 calendar days of the event marking their
deactivation.




SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                    18
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


3.3. GLOBAL VISIBILITY IN DRRS.

   a. The permanent home location, permanent operational control, and permanently assigned
CCMD must be documented for each unit directly in DRRS using specific Joint Staff managed
geographic location codes to support data exchange with GFM and other DoD business systems.

      (1) This data is the “in garrison” or EFS “at rest” business rule of GFM DI. Force
management actions that result in a permanent change to these data elements will be documented
in DRRS via EFS OS updates.

       (2) OS owners will report permanent home location changes in OS within 24 hours of
the home location effective date and submitted to DRRS to support GFM day-to-day operations
and wartime planning.

    b. To support the “in motion” global visibility of Military Service, joint units, and CSAs for
operations and wartime planning movement of units away from their home location for events
lasting longer than 24-hours (e.g., training, deployments, stateside missions, natural
disasters/significant weather events), changes to their current operational control, and change to
their assigned CCMD will be submitted to DRRS.


3.4. MISSION REGISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT IN DRRS.

   a. Missions are derived from strategic guidance captured in various documents (e.g., UCP,
NDS, NMS, JSCP, DoD EMS Superiority Strategy, Named Operations, Secretary of Defense
execute orders) or directed by the Secretary of Defense.

    b. DRRS provides a means to measure and assess the readiness of units to conduct their
designed (core) and assigned missions via a METL construct. Missions will be registered in
DRRS to support this construct for mission capability assessments.

    c. The Joint Staff will manage the DRRS mission registration process to support CCMD,
Military Service, and CSA mission readiness capability assessments to enable the DoD’s
strategic readiness assessment capability and global integration process. Military Service chiefs
will authorize units to only assess against missions approved by Joint Staff and that reside in the
DRRS database.


3.5. MISSION AND CAPABILITY ASSESSMENTS IN DRRS.

    a. Organizations will assess their ability to accomplish their missions and METs to specified
standards and conditions.

       (1) The Joint Staff will provide specific guidance on calculating mission and MET
assessments.




SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                  19
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


       (2) The assessment must consider:

           (a) Necessary resources, both personnel and equipment.

           (b) Training.

           (c) Demonstrated performance in an operationally relevant environment.

           (d) Intelligence-based threats.

           (e) Experience.

           (f) Judgment.

           (g) Applicable certification standards.

           (h) Authorities.

   b. Missions, METs/JMETs, and associated assessments support strategic analysis of the
DoD’s ability to execute the NDS and NMS and are integral to the Chairman’s Readiness
System. CCMDs, CSAs, and Military Service Component Commands must ensure that:

       (1) Missions and METs/JMETs in DRRS align and integrate with operational plans and
command exercises. DRRS assessments incorporate exercise observations, evaluations, and
assessments.

        (2) Missions and MET/JMET assessments align and integrate with command Joint
Lessons Learned Information System Process/Program. DRRS assessments incorporate
validated lessons learned.

       (3) DRRS mission and MET/JMET assessments are provided to the command’s Joint
Capability Integration and Development System manager to support the capability development
process.

    c. As part of MET assessments, units consider the impact of known or unmitigated cyber
vulnerabilities on their ability to accomplish tasks to established standards. MET assessments
will be informed by accomplishment of the MET in a contested or congested cyberspace and the
EMS.

   d. Assessments also consider anything affecting the ability of the organization, unit, or
element to deploy or execute its designed or assigned mission(s) including, but not limited to:

       (1) An operational or training mishap or incident.

       (2) A natural disaster.

       (3) A CBRN incident.

       (4) A natural climate or extreme weather event.


SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                   20
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


       (5) A nefarious or accidental manmade event (e.g., wildfires, damage to facilities).

   e. There is a direct correlation between an organization’s core mission assessment and its
overall resource assessments.

       (1) Resources and training determine if an organization can successfully accomplish its
core mission; therefore, resources and training should be linked.

        (2) An organization cannot be assessed as fully mission capable for its core or designed
mission while simultaneously reporting an overall “C-3 or C-4” in resource reporting. Unlike
core missions, an assigned mission may not require full resourcing or training to be assessed
fully capable.

    f. Commander and director comments will address deficiencies, vulnerabilities, resource
limitations, or other factors (extreme weather impact on accomplishment of training or damage
to equipment/facilities) impacting or hindering accomplishment of designed or assigned mission
when not assessed fully capable. Comments will include recommended mitigations and
anticipated achievement of full capability. MET level comments must address any specified
standards not achieved.


3.6. RESOURCE READINESS REPORTING.

    a. Resource reporting looks at personnel, equipment, training, and ordnance (if applicable)
distinctly and then calculates an overall readiness level (the C-level).

       (1) The overall readiness and its supporting pillars support rapid assessment of the
general readiness of many units.

       (2) The pillars and the supporting data are key inputs to analysis of trends, force
generation cycles, forecasting, war planning, and crisis action planning.

       (3) The capability (mission and MET assessments) and resource reporting together
provide a more comprehensive overview of readiness and support a variety of analysis on trends
and forecasts of the availability of ready forces across various capabilities.

    b. Personnel resource reporting (P-level) requirements will be standardized and automated
across Military Service units in DRRS, as appropriate.

       (1) It provides a general overview of total strength, critical skills, or leadership. Once
combined with detailed underlying authoritative data matching individuals to the billets,
personnel data can provide more insight into skill progression, tenure, cohesion, and individual
medical readiness.

       (2) The Joint Staff will provide specific guidance on calculating P-levels.




SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                   21
                                                              DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


    c. Equipment and supplies on hand (S-level) requirements will be standardized and
automated across Military Service units in DRRS, as appropriate, for aircraft, ground combat
vehicles, weapon systems, ship platforms, and other equipment as necessary.

       (1) The S-level will include the Military Service prescribed major mission essential
equipment, weapon system, and primary mission authorized aircraft by type model series (TMS)
or mission design series (MDS) requirements and possessed from their authoritative data
sources.

       (2) The Joint Staff will provide specific guidance on calculating S-levels.

    d. Equipment condition levels (R-level) will be standardized and automated across Military
Service units in DRRS, as appropriate, and incorporate the mission capable materiel condition
status of the unit’s assigned major mission essential equipment (weapon system, aircraft
(TMS/MDS), ground combat vehicles) or ship platform materiel condition status.

       (1) Supporting data can provide detailed analysis of efforts and time necessary raise the
R-level.

       (2) The Joint Staff will provide specific guidance on calculating R-levels.

    e. Training levels (T-level) will be standardized and automated across Military Service units
in DRRS as appropriate, incorporating both unit collective and individual skill requirements,
including skill sustainment and skill progression within the unit, needed to accomplish the core
mission.

       (1) T-levels will address TMS/MDS training as appropriate. Training data should
support planning process by providing supporting data on sustainment of current levels, time and
resources required to achieve training standards.

       (2) The Joint Staff will provide specific guidance on calculating T-levels.

    f. Ordnance resource ratings will be standardized and automated across Military Service
units in DRRS as appropriate. The Joint Staff will provide specific guidance on applicability and
calculating ordnance resource levels.

    g. Commanders and directors overall C-level comments will clearly address all resource and
training deficiencies, their impact on overall unit readiness, and mitigation steps required to
improve the resource or training area (e.g., personnel, equipment, supplies, materiel condition,
maintenance, ordnance). Commanders and directors will capture the effects of extreme weather
on training evolutions (deferred or lost), equipment condition (damage) and readiness to operate
in a CBRN contaminated environment in their comments.

    h. The commander of a unit who is responsible for reporting of the readiness of the unit is
prohibited from making any upgrade or downgrade of the overall rating of the unit (C-level) for
such reporting purposes based in whole or in part on subjective factors. An officer in a general
or flag officer grade in the chain of command may waive the prohibition if the officer considers
the waiver appropriate in the circumstances. The commander’s overall C-level comments must


SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                22
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


include the name, grade, position, date, and summary of the waiver. The commander’s overall
C-level comments will also provide clear and concise reasoning behind the primary logic for the
upgrade or downgrade, and what steps have been taken to mitigate the deficiency. and the details
of the waiver to the prohibition. Comments will address mismatches or technical issues in
authoritative data sources or auto-populated data and actions being taken to resolve them.


3.7. THREAT INFORMED CAPABILITY READINESS REPORTING IN DRRS.

    a. To support strategic readiness assessments, operational, and tactical-level headquarters
organizations capability core assessments must account for assigned forces and address the
intelligence-based threat assessments for the threats as addressed in the NDS, defense planning
guidance, or specific theater area of operations or contingency plan adversaries.

    b. Military Services and CSAs will develop capability assessment criteria in DRRS for
tactical-level organizations to assess their core mission METS performed with appropriate
conditions, including CBRN contamination, and standards necessary to accomplish the mission
in a specific threat environment. These capability assessments will address the unit’s ability to
accomplish METs in environments of escalating threat.


3.8. CONTESTED AND CONGESTED CYBERSPACE READINESS REPORTING IN
DRRS.

    a. To support strategic readiness assessments, joint force commanders must develop
requirements associated with conducting operations or missions in a contested and congested
cyberspace environment. Joint force commanders will incorporate these requirements and
associated risks when developing or updating plans, and when conducting assessments in DRRS
on their ability to accomplish operations and missions.

    b. Military Service tactical units and CSAs must train and account for their ability to operate
and accomplish designed or assigned missions in a contested and congested cyberspace
environment via conditions and standards incorporated in applicable METs. The ability to
accomplish designed or assigned missions in a contested or congested cyberspace will be
incorporated into the unit’s designed or assigned mission assessments in DRRS.

   c. Military Services and CSAs will develop appropriate training, tactics, and procedures to
address accomplishment of designed or assigned missions in contested and congested cyberspace
conditions.

    d. Military Services and CSAs will include in their reporting the known cyber vulnerabilities
of weapon systems, platforms, critical assets, and infrastructure that impact the CCDRs ability to
conduct their assigned missions in congested and contested cyberspace conditions.




SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                  23
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


3.9. EMS READINESS REPORTING IN DRRS.

    a. To support strategic readiness assessments and align with the goals of the DoD EMS3,
joint force commanders must develop requirements associated with conducting operations or
missions in the EMOE. EMS readiness is defined in JP 3-85 as the ability of military forces to
operate, fight, and meet the demands of assigned missions given the following:

       (1) The EMOE with regard to the planned scheme of maneuver.

       (2) The required operations in the EMS and the amount of electromagnetic interference
expected.

       (3) The difference between EMS assets required and those assigned.

       (4) The EMS compatibility between assigned assets.

    b. Military Service tactical units must train and account for their EMS readiness. EMS
readiness will be incorporated into the unit’s designed and assigned mission assessments in
DRRS.

    c. Military Services will develop appropriate training, tactics, and procedures to EMS
readiness.


3.10. MEDICAL CAPABILITY READINESS REPORTING IN DRRS.

   a. Accounting for and assessing joint force operational medical capability readiness is a key
element to enabling the DoD’s execution of the NDS and supporting contingency operations.

   b. Military Services and DHA will direct that all operational and institutional medical units
required for forward resuscitative care, enroute care, patient movement, theater hospitalization,
and definitive care capability as defined in JP 4-02 are registered in their respective OS (and
subsequently in DRRS).

    c. Military Services will direct that these designated medical units’ core mission is reported
in DRRS via a mission assessment and a resource readiness report. This assessment will be in
accordance with readiness reporting policies.

    d. Military Services will direct that non-medical units possessing a Role 2 forward
resuscitative care capability assess and report medical capabilities in DRRS using the
standardized UJTs as part of the unit’s core mission.

    e. DHA, develop Agency METs to enable medical supporting infrastructure, medical supply
chain, medical logistics support to conduct and report capability assessments for core and
assigned missions. METLs in DRRS will reflect all definitive care and specialized medical unit
or organization mission capabilities within the range of military activities associated with joint
capability areas and joint military capabilities.




SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                  24
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


3.11. MILITARY DEPARTMENT INSTALLATION READINESS REPORTING IN
DRRS.

    a. Standardization and improvement of the fidelity of reported readiness information is key
to achieving the goals laid out in the NDS.

       (1) Greater visibility into military installation and support infrastructure mission
readiness provides a more complete picture and directly supports efforts to build and sustain a
more lethal force.

        (2) The Military Services and CSAs will require all institutional organizations involved
in force generation or support of operational forces will report readiness in DRRS to execute
their core and assigned missions. The Military Services and CSAs will develop essential tasks
with the appropriate and measurable standards and conditions to assess both Military Service and
CSAs and contingency plan requirements.

   b. At a minimum, the following capability areas will be incorporated into core and assigned
missions:

       (1) Environmental disaster response for extreme weather events.

       (2) Disaster response for hazardous material-CBRN.

       (3) Interagency coordination.

       (4) Support for defense critical assets under the mission assurance construct.

       (5) Training range and simulation capability.

       (6) Airfield operations.

       (7) Port operations.

       (8) Healthcare facilities and infrastructure.

       (9) Munition supply, storage, and distribution (SSD).

       (10) Petroleum SSD.

       (11) Other classes of supply SSD.

       (12) Rail operations.

       (13) Billeting capacity.

       (14) Deployment processing centers.

       (15) Pre-deployment processing centers.



SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                   25
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


       (16) Physical security/anti-terrorism operations.

       (17) Cybersecurity.

       (18) Barge ports.

       (19) Intercostal waterway operations.

       (20) Intermodal exchange capabilities.

       (21) Major training areas.

    c. Military Services and CSAs will coordinate with the Joint Staff and CCMDs to develop
UJTs with standardized conditions, outputs, and metrics to address CCMD contingency plan
capability requirements. Military Services and CSAs will incorporate these UJTs into
installation METLs and conduct readiness assessments in the DRRS.

    d. Military Services designated as the lead for joint base/installations will coordinate with
the Joint Staff and CCMDs, and CSAs to develop a single, comprehensive readiness report in the
DRRS to document joint base/installation capabilities in support of strategic readiness.

    e. Military Services and their subordinate commands who manage defense critical
infrastructure as defined under the mission assurance construct will record vulnerabilities
identified during assessments per that will cause the unit or installation to fail its assigned
missions in the DRRS under the “Top Concerns” section to allow tracking of these issues by the
DoD until resolved.


3.12. PREPOSITIONED WAR RESERVE MATERIEL (PWRM) READINESS
REPORTING.

    a. Military Services support CCMDs’ requirements by prepositioning supplies and
equipment at or near the point of planned use to reduce reaction time and provide timely support
of a specific force during initial phases of an operation. This is typically referred to as PWRM.

    b. To support global visibility and strategic readiness assessments, Military Services will
require both afloat and ashore PWRM operational capability materiel requirements (unit type
sets of equipment, operational project stocks, sustainment stocks, allied war reserve materiel,
maritime prepositioned stocks, combat support equipment, fuels support equipment, rapid
airfield damage recovery, expeditionary medical support equipment, force protection equipment
including chemical and biological defense, and basic expeditionary airfield resources) identified
in the Secretary of Defense and Joint Staff strategic planning guidance, or identified through the
Global Pre-positioned Materiel Capability Working Group pursuant to DoDI 3110.06, are
registered in appropriate OS and report readiness in DRRS.

   c. Any event, including Presidential Drawdown Authority, internal Military Service
drawdown, reduced or lost maintenance or support capabilities including whether Military
Service provided or contracted, or other indirect actions that reduce the PWRM contingency or


SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                 26
                                                               DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


wartime operations support capability below C-1 requires submission of an updated readiness
report within 24 hours of the action. The updated readiness report must be submitted within 24
hours of reconstitution actions that improve the PWRM contingency or wartime capability.

    d. Afloat PWRM resource reports will include the unit identification code of the afloat unit
in the embarked field of the organization location data set. Military Services will submit updated
readiness reports within 24 hours of a change in PWRM location or PWRM afloat unit
embarkation or offload.

   e. Military Services will require organizations/units designated to store and maintain
Military Service-postured PWRM report PWRM readiness separate from the unit’s readiness.
This separate reporting will include dependency and availability of contracted support.


3.13. ALLIED AND PARTNER FORCES READINESS REPORTING.

     a. To support strategic readiness assessments and provide a comprehensive view of
combined force readiness and capabilities, the Office of the USD(P&R)’s DRRS-compatible
registration system for allied and partner forces allows for the entry and maintenance of allied
and partner force elements and their readiness without the large interdependency of DRRS with
its underlying authoritative data sources.

   b. When fielded, Service members and civilian employees with appropriate clearance will
have access to enter and maintain the allied and partner data. The data will be compatible with
U.S. DRRS data to allow for a combined and joint view of forces.

        (1) Readiness will include method of collection to include personal observation, open
source, allied or partner report, evaluating the ally or partner in a consolidated strategic
opportunity or exercise, and/or secondhand reporting.

       (2) Responsibility by specific allied or partner nation will be tasked to the appropriate
personnel by the appropriate CCMD.

       (3) Allied and partner readiness assessments will utilize standardized methods, metrics,
and conditions to inform combined force readiness assessments.

       (4) Readiness reporting in the DRRS compatible registration system will include allied
and partner forces employed at the strategic, operational, or tactical levels. Level of employment
may include allied or partner installations or infrastructure necessary for Advanced Base
Operations.

       (5) Allied and partner readiness consists of the partner’s capability and capacity to
perform a mission or task and/or support or enable the joint force to perform a mission or task
through access, basing, overflight, or infrastructure, and the readiness thereof.




SECTION 3: READINESS REPORTING GUIDANCE IN DRRS                                                    27
                                                     DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


                                GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

ACRONYM          MEANING

ASD(R)           Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness

CBRN             chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
CCDR             Combatant Commander
CCMD             Combatant Command
CJCS             Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
CJCSI            Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff instruction
CJCSM            Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff manual
CSA              combat support agency

DHA              Defense Health Agency
DoDD             DoD directive
DoDI             DoD instruction
DRRS             Defense Readiness Reporting System

EFS              enterprise force structure
EMOE             electromagnetic operational environment
EMS              electromagnetic spectrum
EMSO             electromagnetic spectrum operations
EMS3             electromagnetic spectrum superiority strategy
ERMG             Executive Readiness Management Group

GFM              global force management
GFM DI           Global Force Management Data Initiative

JEMSO            joint electromagnetic spectrum operations
JMET             joint mission essential task
JMETL            joint mission essential task list
JP               joint publication
JSCP             Joint Strategic Campaign Plan

MDS              mission design series
MET              mission essential task
METL             mission essential task list

NDS              national defense strategy
NGB              National Guard Bureau
NMS              national military strategy

OS               organization server


GLOSSARY                                                                         28
                                                            DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


ACRONYM                MEANING


PWRM                   prepositioned war reserve materiel

SOF                    special operations forces
SSD                    supply, storage, and distribution

TMS                    type model series

UCP                    Unified Command Plan
UJT                    Universal Joint Task
UJTL                   Universal Joint Task List
U.S.C.                 United States Code
USSOCOM                United States Special Operations Command
USCYBERCOM             United States Cyber Command
USSTRATCOM             United States Strategic Command
USD(P&R)               Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USD(P)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


G.2. DEFINITIONS.

TERM                   DEFINITION

authoritative data     Data sources registered in the DoD Data Services Environment,
source                 which provides an on-line repository enabling use, understanding,
                       and sharing of existing data assets.

assigned mission       The current operation, JSCP mission, or other mission to which a unit
                       is tasked by a higher authority.

capability             The ability to complete a task or execute a course of action under
                       specified conditions and level of performance.

C-level                The overall readiness level as defined in CJCSI 3401.02.

capacity               The extent (scale, scope, and duration parameters) to which a task
                       can be performed. Capacity is the measurable aspects of a capability.

conditions             Defined in CJCSM 3500.04.

congested cyberspace A disconnected, intermittent, or limited environmental aspect of
                     cyberspace where operations might be degraded by unintentional
                     interferences from private sector or military use.




GLOSSARY                                                                                    29
                                                            DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


TERM                   DEFINITION

contested cyberspace   An operational aspect of the cyberspace in which malicious activity
                       threatens or impacts mission effectiveness by degrading information,
                       data exchange, or network capability.

core mission           A mission approved by the Military Service headquarters that is
                       specific to the type of unit according to its authorization document
                       and doctrine, synonymous with a designed mission.

decision-advantage     Provides for informed decision-making using analytics platforms
analytics              underpinned by authoritative data management, artificial intelligence,
                       and robust analytic methods to provide information faster.

designed mission       A mission approved by the Military Service headquarters that is
                       specific to the type of unit according to its authorization document
                       and doctrine, synonymous with a core mission.

doctrinal              An organizational element created for the purpose of designating an
organization           organizational element for mission accomplishment. It can be
                       created for many reasons, including supporting tactics, techniques,
                       procedures, or administrative functions. It documents the way units
                       conduct their business, either operationally or administratively (e.g.,
                       battalion, company, squadron, flight division).

DRRS                   DRRS is continuously evolving as the single statutory and
                       authoritative readiness reporting system for use within the DoD to
                       support strategic readiness and document doctrinal
                       organization/unit/force element resource levels and capability
                       assessments.

DRRS data exchange     DRRS receives data from an evolving set of underlying authoritative
                       data sources that enable the rapid building and increased accuracy of
                       readiness reports. It provides data to many planning and operational
                       execution systems. Collectively this receiving and providing of data
                       via application programming interfaces constitutes DRRS data
                       exchange. Each exchange is government by an agreement between
                       the provider and receiver and an associated data standard.

DRRS group             Functionality within DRRS that provides the ability for authorized
management module      users to create and maintain groups of units to facilitate rapid
                       reporting.

embedded medical       A doctrinal organization where the mission of the unit is not
capability             inherently medical, but the unit possesses Role 2 medical capability




GLOSSARY                                                                                         30
                                                            DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


TERM                    DEFINITION

                        specifically designed to support it. (e.g., Navy carrier with a medical
                        department or an Army Brigade with a medical company).

en route care           Defined in JP 4-02.

EFS                     Defined in DoDI 8260.03.

institutional           Units or organizations involved in force generation or support of
organizations           operational forces (e.g., Service headquarters, supporting
                        establishment, formal schools. Recruiting, and acquisition
                        commands) and are present in the EFS.

joint capability area   Defined in CJCSI 5123.01.

joint military          Defined in CJCSI 5123.01.
capabilities

JMET                    Defined in JP 1-02.

JMETL                   Defined in CJCSM 3500.04.

lowest employable       The smallest distinct, independent, separate, or self-contained
entity                  military force (or unit), whose structure is prescribed by the military
                        department and is organized, trained, and equipped to be employed to
                        provide a military capability to perform specified missions, tasks, or
                        functions. Not an individual Service member or civilian.

medical unit            A doctrinal organization whose designed mission is to provide health
                        service support as defined in JP 4-02 (e.g., Army Field Hospital or
                        Navy Field Surgical Team).

MET                     Defined in DoDD 7730.65.

METL                    Defined in DoDD 7730.65.

military installation   Defined in Section 101(a)(8) of Title 10, U.S.C.

mission capability      The Service doctrinal document that provides the designed
documentation           capabilities of an organization/unit/element.

National Leadership     Defined in DoDD S-3710.01.
Command
Capability




GLOSSARY                                                                                          31
                                                           DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


TERM                   DEFINITION

operational readiness Defined in JP 1-02.

organization           As part of the Organizational and Force Structure Construct from
                       DoDI 8260.03 it is an organizational entity of several enumerated
                       types that exists with EFS.

organization server    Also known as org server or OS is defined in DoDI 8260.03

P-level                The personnel resource level in DRRS as defined in CJCSI 3401.02.

patient movement       Defined in JP 4-02.

prepositioned stock    Materiel stored in remote and field locations held for release to
                       support deploying combat units.

PWRM                   Defined in DoDI 3110.06.

R-level                The equipment condition resource level in DRRS as defined in
                       CJCSI 3401.02.

reconstitution         Defined in DoDI 3110.06.

Role 2-forward         Defined in JP 4-02.
resuscitative care

S-level                The equipment on hand resource level in DRRS as defined in
                       CJCSI 3401.02.

Service echelons       Levels of command within the hierarchical structure of each Service
                       associated with readiness reporting. Terminology is Service specific
                       such as Army structure of army, corps, division, brigade, battalion,
                       and company.

standards              Defined in CJCSM 3500.04.

strategic readiness    Strategic readiness is the ability to build, maintain, and balance
                       warfighting capabilities and competitive advantages that ensure the
                       DoD can achieve strategic objectives across threats and time
                       horizons.

T-level                The unit training resource level in DRRS as defined in
                       CJCSI 3401.02.




GLOSSARY                                                                                      32
                                                          DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


TERM                 DEFINITION

tactical readiness   Ability of a tactical-level unit to perform the mission for which it is
                     organized, designed, or assigned.

threat               Defined in CJCSI 5123.01.

UJT                  Defined in CJCSM 3500.04.

UJTL                 Defined in CJCSM 3500.04.




GLOSSARY                                                                                       33
                                                             DoDI 7730.66, December 10, 2024


                                      REFERENCES
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3110.01, “Joint Strategic Campaign Plan,”
    current edition
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3401.02, “Force Readiness Reporting,”
    current edition
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3460.01, “Combat Support Agency Review
    Team Assessments,” current edition
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 5123.01, “Charter of the Joint Requirements
    Oversight Council and Implementation of the Joint Capabilities and Integration and
    Development System,” current edition
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual 3150.02, “Global Status of Resources and
    Training,” current edition
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual 3500.04, “Universal Joint Task Manual,”
    current edition
DoD Directive, S-3710.01, “National Leadership Command Capability,” May 27, 2015
DoD Directive 5124.02, “Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
    (USD(P&R)),” June 23, 2008
DoD Directive 7730.65, “DoD Readiness Reporting System,” May 31, 2023
DoD Electromagnetic Spectrum Superiority Strategy, June 20, 2023
DoD Instruction 3110.06, “War Reserve Materiel (WRM),” January 7, 2019
DoD Instruction 8260.03, “The Global Force Management Data Initiative (GFM DI),”
    February 19, 2014, as amended
DoD Instruction 8320.02, “Sharing Data, Information, and Technology (IT) Services in the
    Department of Defense,” August 5, 2013, as amended
Executive Readiness Management Group (ERMG) Charter, April 15, 2019
Joint Publication 1-02, “Joint Personnel Support,” current edition
Joint Publication 3-85, “Joint Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations (JEMSO),” May 22, 2020
Joint Publication 4-02, “Joint Health Services,” December 11, 2017
Public Law 87-195, “The Foreign Assistance Act,” September 4, 1961
United States Code, Title 10
United States Code, Title 32




REFERENCES                                                                                      34
