                             DOD INSTRUCTION 3100.11
MANAGEMENT OF LASER ILLUMINATION OF OBJECTS IN SPACE

Originating Component:       Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy

Effective:                   October 24, 2016

Releasability:               Cleared for public release. Available on the DoD Issuances Website at
                             http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.

Reissues and Cancels:        DoD Instruction 3100.11, “Illumination of Objects in Space by Lasers”
                             March 31, 2000

Incorporates and Cancels: Directive-type Memorandum 07-002, “Routine Laser Illumination for
                          Operational Space Situational Awareness (SSA),” December 28, 2012
                          Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Approval of F-35 Joint
                          Strike Fighter (JSF) Activities under DoDI 3100.11, Illumination of
                          Objects in Space by Lasers,” November 6, 2011

Approved by:                 Brian P. McKeon, Acting Under Secretary of Defense for Policy


Purpose: In accordance with the authority in DoD Directive (DoDD) 5111.1 and the November 30,
2006, Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, this issuance:
• Establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures, in accordance with DoDD
3100.10, for the DoD management of risks associated with laser illuminations of objects in space.
• Establishes the requirement for a quantitative probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) process to
categorize DoD-owned or -operated lasers that could direct energy above the horizon or in space and
implements risk acceptance standards for DoD-owned or -operated resident space objects (RSOs).
• Establishes an exempt category of lasers that do not require coordination, notification, or permission
before use due to the minimal risk they pose to RSOs.
• Provides guidance on management of DoD-owned and -operated lasers that have transitioned from
research, development, test and evaluation (RDT&E) status into DoD weapon systems.
• Supersedes the unclassified information in the May 15, 2014, Commander Joint Functional
Component Command for Space (JFCC SPACE) Memorandum; and the 2011-01 Director, National
Reconnaissance Office (NRO) Memorandum.
                                                                                               DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION .............................................................................. 3
   1.1. Applicability. .................................................................................................................... 3
   1.2. Policy. ............................................................................................................................... 3
   1.3. Information Collections. ................................................................................................... 4
SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES ......................................................................................................... 5
   2.1. Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P))............................................................. 5
   2.2. USD for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics (AT&L). .............................................. 5
   2.4. DoD Component Heads. ................................................................................................... 6
   2.5. Director of the National Reconnaissance Office (DNRO). .............................................. 7
   2.6. Secretaries of the Military Departments. .......................................................................... 7
   2.7. Secretary of the Air Force. ................................................................................................ 8
   2.8. CJCS. ................................................................................................................................ 8
   2.9. Combatant Commanders Other Than CDRUSSTRATCOM. .......................................... 8
   2.10. CDRUSSTRATCOM. .................................................................................................... 8
SECTION 3: PROCEDURES .............................................................................................................. 11
   3.1. Risk Management. .......................................................................................................... 11
   3.2 Coordination. ................................................................................................................... 13
   3.3. Transition of Lasers from RDT&E to Integration into DoD Weapon Systems. ............. 14
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 17
   G.1. Acronyms. ...................................................................................................................... 17
   G.2. Definitions...................................................................................................................... 17
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................. 21
FIGURES
Figure 1. Laser System Classification Process ............................................................................ 11




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                                              2
                                                                 DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


               SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION

1.1. APPLICABILITY. This issuance applies to:

    a. The OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of the Inspector General of the
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other
organizational entities within the DoD (referred to collectively in this issuance as the “DoD
Components”).

   b. All DoD-owned or -operated lasers, whether land-, air-, sea-, or space-based systems,
conducting lasing operations in space or intending to direct energy above the horizon that may
unintentionally illuminate RSOs.

    c. All DoD-owned or -operated lasers that deliberately illuminate points in space or RSOs
for any purpose.

  d. All DoD-owned, -leased, or -operated RSOs, and other RSOs as specified by the
Commander, United States Strategic Command (CDRUSSTRATCOM).


1.2. POLICY.

    a. DoD laser activities must not be intentionally designed for, or used to cause, permanent
blindness in humans, in accordance with the January 17, 1997, Secretary of Defense (SecDef)
Memorandum.

    b. DoD laser activities in space, or other DoD laser activities that may direct energy above
the horizon, must be conducted in a safe and responsible manner, consistent with national
security requirements, in order to manage the associated risks to space systems, those systems’
mission effectiveness, and humans in space.

    c. DoD RSO activities must implement mission assurance measures to minimize the risk of
damage from intentional and unintentional laser illumination from any source, taking into
consideration the proliferation of foreign and domestic commercial and government laser
systems. DoD activities leasing satellite services are encouraged to utilize providers that
implement mission assurance measures to minimize the risk of damage from laser illumination.

  d. DoD will use a risk management approach to control unintentional laser illumination of
RSOs. This approach will:

       (1) Support efficient development, acquisition, testing, and fielding of laser systems,
including weapon systems that meet the requirements in the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff Manual (CJCSM) 3230.01, while ensuring the risk of damage to RSOs or mission
degradation of RSOs that support DoD missions due to unintentional laser illumination is
minimized to the greatest extent practicable.



SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                            3
                                                                   DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


       (2) Promote the safe and responsible use of lasers by non-DoD laser owners and
operators, as illustrated by this instruction, to balance the benefits of laser and RSO activities.


1.3. INFORMATION COLLECTIONS. The Deconfliction (DECON) database, referred to in
Paragraph 2.10.l, has been assigned report control symbol DD-POL(AR)2619 in accordance with
the procedures in Volume 1 of DoD Manual 8910.01. The expiration date of this information
collection is listed in the DoD Information Collections System at
https://apps.osd.mil/sites/DoDIIC/Pages/default.aspx.




SECTION 1: GENERAL ISSUANCE INFORMATION                                                               4
                                                                  DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


                           SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY (USD(P)) The USD(P):

    a. Coordinates approval of all laser activities that require SecDef approval, as specified in
this issuance.

    b. Notifies the SecDef when CDRUSSTRATCOM reports that a lasing outside authorized
parameters (LOAP) event likely resulted in harm to RSOs or to humans in space.

    c. Manages notifying, or consulting, foreign governments, as appropriate, for laser activities
that require SecDef approval.

   d. Coordinates implementation of space policy-related responsibilities of the CJCSM
3230.01.

    e. Promotes standards and norms of responsible behavior with stakeholders in the DoD
Components, other U.S. departments and agencies, commercial companies, and academic
institutions, as well as external stakeholders such as foreign military and government partners
and commercial entities, with which DoD has relevant cooperative agreements to maximize RSO
safety and promote responsible laser operations.

    f. Coordinates with the CJCS on developing reasonable expectation standards for risk
assessment using appropriate assumptions, thresholds, and dynamics.


2.2. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND
LOGISTICS (USD(AT&L)). The USD(AT&L):

    a. Oversees all SecDef-approved laser activities to ensure full compliance with arms control
treaties and associated international agreements, in accordance with DoDD 2060.1.

    b. Oversees the implementation of mission assurance, through resilient approaches, into
satellite technology development and acquisition to protect DoD RSO activities and their
missions from damage or interference that could be caused by laser illumination.

   c. Oversees the development and deployment of laser notification, coordination,
deconfliction, and modeling software and information technology systems that:

       (1) Assure effective coordination with and notification of CDRUSSTRATCOM as
defined in this issuance.

       (2) Provide a deployable, mobile, and decentralized deconfliction solution.

       (3) Are compatible with fielded systems and enable operational timelines.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                         5
                                                                 DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


      (4) Model the interactions between laser activities and RSOs, including appropriate
assumptions, thresholds, and dynamics to:

           (a) Categorize laser types and activities.

           (b) Perform quantifiable PRA.

           (c) Support coordination efforts.

   d. Ensures that all new DoD laser activities are compliant with this issuance through
evaluation during milestone review.


2.3. UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE (USD(I)). The USD(I):

    a. Coordinates intelligence-related matters with appropriate Principal Staff Assistants, the
Principal DoD Space Advisor, DoD Component heads, the Director of National Intelligence, and
others, as needed, to:

       (1) Promote safe use of lasers above the horizon or in space.

       (2) Ensure resilience against laser activities that may adversely impact the operation of
space-borne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance or related intelligence systems.

    b. Coordinates with CJCS on developing reasonable expectation standards. Coordinates the
implementation of reasonable expectation standards with CDRUSSTRATCOM. Ensures risks
to, and mission degradation of, RSO activities that support DoD missions are minimized to the
greatest extent practicable.


2.4. DOD COMPONENT HEADS. The DoD Component heads:

  a. Register DoD laser activities that may direct energy above the horizon or in space with
CDRUSSTRATCOM for categorization.

    b. Coordinate with CDRUSSTRATCOM, in accordance with Paragraph 3.1, to develop and
implement reasonable expectation standards and risk assessment criteria to categorize laser types
or activities:

       (1) In space; or

       (2) Intended to direct energy above the horizon or in space.

    c. In accordance with Paragraph 3.2, notify CDRUSSTRATCOM before using Category II
laser types or conducting Category II activities per procedures established by
CDRUSSTRATCOM unless the laser activity is waived.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                        6
                                                                DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


    d. In accordance with Paragraph 3.2, notify and coordinate with CDRUSSTRATCOM
before using Category III laser types or conducting Category III activities per procedures
established by CDRUSSTRATCOM unless the laser activity is waived.

   e. Submit any requests for laser activities requiring SecDef approval, in accordance with
Paragraph 3.4, through USD(P).

    f. Develop and implement RSO standards to support laser testing, training, exercising, and
maintenance on lasers integration into a DoD “weapon system,” as defined in Joint Publication 1-
02, in coordination with CDRUSSTRATCOM.

    g. Notify CDRUSSTRATCOM of all LOAP events that propagate energy above the horizon
or in space.

   h. Ensure records management practices adhere to DoDI 5015.02.


2.5. DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL RECONNAISSANCE OFFICE (DNRO). Under
the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I), and in addition to the responsibilities in
Paragraph 2.4., the DNRO:

    a. Participates in CJCS development, and CDRUSSTRATCOM implementation, of
reasonable expectation standards for risk assessment using appropriate assumptions, thresholds,
and dynamics.

    b. Deconflicts NRO operations from special use space ranges established in support of laser
activities.

   c. Plans and provides for survival, recovery, and reconstitution of NRO mission-essential
functions pursuant to DoDD 3020.26.


2.6. SECRETARIES OF THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS. In addition to the
responsibilities in Paragraph 2.4, the Secretaries of the Military Departments:

   a. Field laser weapon systems for operational employment according to procedures in DoDI
5000.69 and CJCSM 3230.01.

    b. Develop and deploy software and information technology systems identified in Paragraph
2.2.c, in collaboration with CDRUSSTRATCOM and the other Military Departments, and under
the oversight of the USD(AT&L).

    c. In accordance with CDRUSSTRATCOM procedures, conduct risk assessments and
establish safety requirements for DoD RSO activities, ensuring risks to and mission degradation
of DoD RSOs are minimized to the greatest extent practicable.

   d. Establish processes for their respective Military Departments to implement this issuance
while keeping CDRUSSTRATCOM informed.



SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                       7
                                                                 DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


2.7. SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE. In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraphs
2.4 and 2.6, and in his or her capacity as the Principal DoD Space Advisor, the Secretary of the
Air Force:

    a. Oversees development of requirements for mission assurance through resilient approaches
that protect DoD-owned, -leased, and -operated RSO activities and their missions from damage
or interference that could be caused by all types of laser illumination.

    b. Oversees and assesses the integration of mission assurance requirements into space
system technology development and acquisition.


2.8. CJCS. In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.4, the CJCS develops procedures
and updates CJCS Instruction 3225.01 to implement this issuance, including the development of
a tailored risk management process consistent with Military Standard 882E and Section 3 of this
issuance. The procedures must include laser activity characterization as well as the assessment,
mitigation, and acceptance of risk to DoD RSO activities from DoD laser activities.


2.9. COMBATANT COMMANDERS OTHER THAN CDRUSSTRATCOM. In addition to
the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.4, the Combatant Commanders will submit initial laser
weapon system operational employment proposals to CDRUSSTRATCOM in accordance with
the procedures in CJCSM 3230.01.


2.10. CDRUSSTRATCOM. In addition to the responsibilities in Paragraph 2.4,
CDRUSSTRATCOM:

   a. Ensures appropriate risk mitigation, as described in Paragraph 3.1.b, of intentional or
unintentional laser illumination of RSOs by DoD laser activities.

   b. Implements the procedures developed by the CJCS, including laser activity
characterization, and the assessment, mitigation, and, per Paragraph 3.1.c, acceptance of risk to
DoD RSO activities from laser illumination, in coordination with the DNRO, other relevant DoD
Component heads, and other applicable non-DoD stakeholders.

    c. Provides timely and accurate data to support notification, coordination, and deconfliction
services as required in Paragraph 3.1.

        (1) Data and services will be provided in a manner to support normal operations of
fielded laser activities and RSO activities.

        (2) Notification services will include notifying satellite owners or operators of upcoming
laser activities.

   d. Develops and implements standards, in coordination with the CJCS, DNRO, and other
appropriate DoD Component heads:




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                         8
                                                                  DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


       (1) To protect RSOs from laser illumination.

        (2) That enable laser testing, training, exercising, and maintenance of lasers integrated
into a DoD weapon system.

   e. Develops and distributes requirements for notifications to, and consultations with, foreign
governments and associated SecDef approval to DoD Component heads in accordance with
Paragraph 3.4.

    f. Manages the safe and responsible conduct of DoD laser activities in space, or directed
above the horizon, to ensure that the risks to RSOs are mitigated appropriately. May designate
an appropriate commander to oversee the management of these laser activities and associated
risk mitigation measures.

   g. Exercises authority to grant notification and coordination waivers to laser owners and
operators for laser activities above the horizon, in accordance with this issuance.

       (1) Waivers will specify the time period and the activities permitted.

        (2) Time periods will be flexible enough to ensure effectiveness of the intended activity,
but narrow enough to ensure oversight by the granting authority.

    h. Encourages safe and responsible laser operations when there is a reasonable expectation
that such operations could damage DoD RSO activities by developing and distributing guidance
to use with foreign military partners, foreign defense entities, and commercial and civil entities,
in coordination with the USD(P), CJCS, and other appropriate DoD Component heads.

    i. When requested by non-DoD laser owners and operators, and as resources allow, provides
notification and coordination services for illumination above the horizon by ground-, air-, sea-,
or space-based lasers.

       (1) A CDRUSSTRATCOM-developed prioritization method will be used to ensure
resources remain available to DoD Components.

       (2) CDRUSSTRATCOM will emphasize providing services to non-DoD laser activities
corresponding to Category III.

   j. Supports efforts by the USD(AT&L) and appropriate DoD Component heads to use
measures such as resiliency to protect DoD RSO activities from all laser illumination.

    k. Supports the development and maintenance of DoD-standard software and information
technology systems identified in Paragraph 2.2.c.(l).

   l. Maintains technical database DECON, in coordination with DoD Components, on:

       (1) Capabilities of worldwide lasers that are or may be employed above the horizon or in
space and that could damage or interfere with DoD RSO activities.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                           9
                                                                DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


       (2) Appropriate worldwide RSOs, including non-DoD U.S. Government RSOs that may
be susceptible or vulnerable to damage or interference from unintentional laser illumination.

      (3) Incidents that involve actual or suspected damage from laser illumination to DoD
RSO activities.

   m. Ensures that approval of testing, training, exercising, and maintenance is made at the
lowest authority level consistent with guidelines in this issuance.

  n. Reports all known arms control non-compliant laser activities to USD(AT&L) and
USD(P) per guidance provided in DoDD 2060.1.

   o. When notified of an LOAP event:

       (1) Coordinates with RSO owners and operators to determine if the LOAP resulted in
harm to RSOs or humans in space.

       (2) Reports the determination to CJCS, USD(P), and the Principal DoD Space Advisor
when it is likely that the event caused harm to RSOs or humans in space. Such reports must
include a summary of the laser event and an assessment of likely impacts to any humans or
RSOs.

  p. Conducts legal reviews, as necessary, of proposed illumination of non-DoD RSOs by
DoD laser activities.

    q. Consults with the DoD Component heads on laser system design features, operational
procedures, security, and system safety rules to minimize damaging illumination to, or
interference with, RSOs.

    r. Maintains a lasing approval list (LAL) of RSOs that may serve as targets for laser
illumination. Upon request, provides the LAL to relevant DoD Component heads.

    s. With input from appropriate DoD RSO activities, approves requests for special use space
ranges in support of testing, training, exercising, and maintenance on DoD laser activity.
Notifies appropriate satellite owners and operators of the establishment and parameters of the
established special use space range.

    t. Maintains a master test and operations schedule of upcoming events that deliberately
illuminate RSOs. CDRUSSTRATCOM provides appropriate RSO owners with access to the
master test and operations schedule.




SECTION 2: RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                    10
                                                                       DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


                                  SECTION 3: PROCEDURES

3.1. RISK MANAGEMENT. The following procedures, in conjunction with the tailored risk
management practices established in CJCS Instruction 3225.01 and consistent with Military
Standard 882E, will be implemented to reduce the risk of adverse effects due to unintentional
laser illumination of RSOs and to ensure DoD laser activities are conducted in a safe and
responsible manner.

                           Figure 1. Laser System Classification Process




   a. Risk Assessment. CDRUSSTRATCOM will implement a two layer risk assessment
approach. A deterministic methodology will be used to identify laser activities that do not pose a risk to
RSOs. A probabilistic methodology will then be used to determine the probability of occurrence and
hazard severity for those laser activities that do pose a risk to RSOs as determined by the deterministic
analysis. Figure 1 illustrates this process.

        (1) All DoD laser owners and operators directing energy above the horizon or in space
will register basic system parameters and concepts of operation with CDRUSSTRATCOM.

        (2) CDRUSSTRATCOM will conduct a risk assessment to categorize the laser type and
activity. Analysis supporting this assessment will include, but not be limited to, reasonable
atmospheric conditions, simplified laser platform dynamics, and duration of expected
interactions.

           (a) Category I. Laser activities in this category are exempt from further
coordination with, or notification to, CDRUSSTRATCOM. Laser types and activities will be in
Category I when they meet one or more of the following criteria:

                1. Laser activities that are assessed, by deterministic analysis, as posing no risk to
    RSOs.



SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                                       11
                                                                  DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


               2. Laser activities that are not directed above the horizon.

              3. Laser glints from test targets that may be sea-, land-, or air-based and
   inadvertent space based glint.

               4. Hand-held tactical lasers.

              5. Operational employment of laser activities, in actual use, that are approved,
   accepted, and integrated into a DoD “weapon systems” as defined by Joint Publication 1-02,
   including laser weapons approved for operational use.

            (b) Category II. Laser activities in this category require CDRUSSTRATCOM
notification before use, but do not require further coordination unless deliberately targeting an
RSO. Laser activities will be in Category II when they meet one or more of the following
criteria:

               1. Laser activities conducted from a defined location, found, by deterministic
   analysis, to pose no risk to RSOs, not operated in accordance with Category I, and assessed,
   by probabilistic risk assessment, to pose a risk to RSO activities no greater than other
   nominal safety of flight and mission risks.

               2. Testing, training, exercising, and maintenance of laser activities conducted
   within the constraints of a special use space range as defined by CDRUSSTRATCOM.

        (c) Category III. Laser activities in this category require CDRUSSTRATCOM
notification and coordination before use. Laser types and activities will be in Category III when
one or more of the following criteria are met:

              1. Laser activities found to pose a risk to satellites by deterministic analysis that
   do not meet any Category I or II criteria and are assessed by probabilistic risk assessment to
   pose a greater risk to RSO activities than other nominal safety of flight and mission risks.

               2. Planned testing, training, exercising, and maintenance of laser activities that
   are approved, accepted, and integrated into a DoD “weapon system,” as defined in Joint
   Publication 1-02. This includes laser weapons approved for operational use and that pose a
   greater risk to RSO activities than other nominal safety of flight and mission risks.

               3. Laser activities found, by deterministic analysis, to pose no risk to RSOs, not
   operated in accordance with Category I, and assessed by probabilistic risk assessment to pose
   a risk to RSO activities no greater than other nominal safety of flight and mission risks but
   for which no defined operating location is provided to CDRUSSTRATCOM.

        (3) DoD laser owners and operators may request CDRUSSTRATCOM support to
establish additional system or operational risk mitigations.

   b. Risk Mitigation. Mitigation of risk to RSO activities may include, but are not limited to:




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                               12
                                                                DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


       (1) Mission assurance and resilience measures taken by DoD RSO activities consistent
with DoDD 3020.26.

        (2) Procedures undertaken by DoD RSO activities when CDRUSSTRATCOM provides
notification services of Category II laser activities.

       (3) Coordination services provided by CDRUSSTRATCOM to balance laser and RSO
mission requirements.

         (4) Timely and accurate data to support deconfliction for DoD Category III laser
activities.

    c. Risk Acceptance. The authority to accept the residual risk for Category II and III laser
systems will be commensurate with the risk category. CJCS Instruction 3225.01 will define
these acceptance levels.


3.2 COORDINATION.

    a. Category II Notification. DoD laser owners or operators conducting Category II laser
activities, as defined in Paragraph 3.1 of this issuance, must comply with the following
procedures:

       (1) DoD laser owners and operators must provide notification of upcoming laser events
in accordance with CDRUSSTRATCOM procedures and timelines.

       (2) If targeting an RSO, the laser owner or operator will:

            (a) Request approval for laser operations in accordance with Paragraph 3.4 of this
issuance.

            (b) Only illuminate:

               1. Targets from the LAL in accordance with any required restrictions;

               2. U.S. rocket bodies or debris for non-destructive illumination;

            3. RSOs approved for illumination by the RSO owner through written permission
using a CDRUSSTRATCOM-approved format; or

               4. RSOs authorized by CDRUSSTRATCOM in safety-of-flight situations.

   b. Category III Notification and Coordination. Laser owners and operators conducting
Category III laser activities, in accordance with Paragraph 3.1 of this issuance, and DoD owners
and operators of RSOs, must comply with the following procedures:

       (1) DoD laser owners and operators will:




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                             13
                                                                 DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


       (a) Notify CDRUSSTRATCOM of upcoming laser events in accordance with
CDRUSSTRATCOM procedures and timelines.

          (b) Implement coordination direction received from CDRUSSTRATCOM.

          (c) If targeting an RSO, the laser owner or operator will:

                 1. Request approval for laser operations in accordance with Paragraph 3.4.

                 2. Only illuminate:

                    a. Targets from the LAL in accordance with any required restrictions;

                    b. U.S. rocket bodies or debris for non-destructive illumination;

                  c. RSOs approved for illumination by the RSO owner through written
permission using a CDRUSSTRATCOM-approved format; or

                    d. RSOs authorized by CDRUSSTRATCOM in safety-of-flight
circumstances.

       (2) DoD RSO activities will:

             (a) Coordinate with CDRUSSTRATCOM to deconflict RSO tasking with requested
laser activities when deemed appropriate by CDRUSSTRATCOM.

           (b) Implement direction received from CDRUSSTRATCOM as a result of
coordination services.

       (3) CDRUSSTRATCOM will:

           (a) Coordinate between laser activities and RSO taskings to maximize the probability
of completing each mission.

          (b) Provide coordination services to DoD laser and RSO activities.

    c. Waiver Request. DoD laser owners or operators will submit requests for waiver of
notification and coordination requirements for specific laser activities to CDRUSSTRATCOM in
the CDRUSSTRATCOM-specified format.

   d. LOAP. DoD laser owners and operators will immediately report any LOAP incident or
unauthorized illumination of a target above the horizon or in space to CDRUSSTRATCOM.


3.3. TRANSITION OF LASERS FROM RDT&E TO INTEGRATION INTO DOD
WEAPON SYSTEMS. DoD laser activities intended for integration into a DoD “weapon
system,” as defined by Joint Publication 01-02, must comply with the following procedures
before and subsequent to integration for each phase:



SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                         14
                                                                 DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


   a. RDT&E Period. DoD laser owners or operators will:

      (1) Register the laser with CDRUSSTRATCOM by providing the laser system
parameters using a CDRUSSTRATCOM-approved process and format.

       (2) Obtain CDRUSSTRATCOM categorization assignment (i.e., Category I, II, or III) or
operate in accordance with any approved waivers.

       (3) Coordinate with or notify CDRUSSTRATCOM for testing, training, exercising, and
maintenance of laser activities according to categorization and other procedures in this issuance.

    b. End of RDT&E Period and Transition to DoD Weapon System Integration. DoD
laser owners or operators will:

    (1) Submit initial weapon system operational employment proposals to
CDRUSSTRATCOM for information.

       (2) Submit initial laser weapon system operational employment proposals to CJCS
according to procedures in CJCSM 3230.01 for approval.

        (3) In accordance with this issuance, coordinate with and notify CDRUSSTRATCOM
for laser testing, training, exercising, and maintenance when such activities involve lasing above-
the-horizon or in space.

   c. Full Integration into DoD Weapon Systems. DoD laser owners and operators will:

       (1) Operationally employ authorized DoD weapon systems without the need for further
coordination, in accordance with applicable rules of engagement, and execute orders.

         (2) In accordance with this issuance, coordinate with and notify CDRUSSTRATCOM
for testing, training, exercising, and maintenance of laser activities within an authorized DoD
weapon system that lase above-the-horizon or in space.

        (3) Coordinate with and notify CDRUSSTRATCOM in accordance with the laser activity
classification for laser activities not governed by rules of engagement and execute orders.

3.4 AUTHORIZATION OF DELIBERATE LASER ILLUMINATIONS OF RSOS.

   a. Operational illuminations: Deliberate laser illuminations of RSOs for space situational
awareness, detection, pointing, ranging, tracking, communications, and imaging will be
conducted as follows:

        (1) Illuminations will only be conducted on objects on the LAL using procedures
established by CDRUSSTRATCOM. Illuminations will be captured in the master test and
operations schedule. Such laser operations must not interfere with the RSO’s operation or place
the illuminated objects at undue risk.




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                             15
                                                                    DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


        (2) Laser illumination of any RSO may be authorized by CDRUSSTRATCOM without
prior consent of the RSO’s owner to address safety of flight risks.

    b. Test illuminations: Deliberate laser tests illuminating RSOs will be reflected in a master
test and operations schedule maintained by CDRUSSTRATCOM and approved at the following
levels:

        (1) SecDef approval is required for any use of Category III lasers to conduct testing,
training, exercising, and maintenance activities designed to illuminate RSOs when:

            (a) The DoD Component head determines that the activity may have an impact on
foreign relations or foreign partners;

            (b) The activity raises an issue of compliance with arms control treaty obligations or
other international legal obligations;

            (c) The activity requires coordination with other U.S. Government departments and
agencies;

            (d) The activity may result in adverse media coverage; or

          (e) CDRUSSTRATCOM or USD(P) otherwise determines the laser activity requires
SecDef approval.

        (2) Secretaries of the Military Departments are the approval authority for, and must
notify the USD(P) of, laser activities from all categories that are:

            (a) The first test, series of tests, demonstrations, or exercises of a kind.

            (b) Vulnerability tests illuminating an RSO in space.

    c. RSO owner permissions: RSO owners may approve deliberate routine laser illumination
of their own assets.




SECTION 3: PROCEDURES                                                                            16
                                                                 DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


                                          GLOSSARY

G.1. ACRONYMS.

CDRUSSTRATCOM             Commander, United States Strategic Command
CJCS                      Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
CJCSI                     Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction
CJCSM                     Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual

DNRO                      Director of the National Reconnaissance Office
DoDD                      DoD directive
DoDI                      DoD instruction

LAL                       lasing approval list
LOAP                      lasing outside authorized parameters

PRA                       probabilistic risk assessment

RDT&E                     research, development, test, and evaluation
RSO                       resident space object

SecDef                    Secretary of Defense

USD(AT&L)                 Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
USD(I)                    Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
USD(P)                    Under Secretary of Defense for Policy



G.2. DEFINITIONS.

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this issuance.

above-the-horizon. Direct laser energy that is not terminated by land, water, or other terrestrial
backstop.

air-to-air. Laser energy from an airborne platform that is directed towards a separate airborne
object and that may continue to Earth’s surface or into space.

air-to-surface. Laser energy from an airborne platform that is ultimately terminated by land,
water, or other terrestrial backstop.

coordination services. A process by which CDRUSSTRATCOM will balance laser and
satellite mission requirements to mitigate potential hazards and maximize joint force capability.




GLOSSARY                                                                                          17
                                                                  DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


deconfliction. A procedure that governs the firing of a laser that may intentionally or
inadvertently illuminate RSOs. The procedure may be conducted using a centralized,
decentralized, or other approved method.

deterministic analysis. A quantitative analysis of the effect on RSOs by a specific laser system
or activity when the laser is modeled as illuminating the RSOs. The analysis will utilize
simplifying and conservative assumptions.

DoD laser activities. Laser activities receiving resources, manpower, or funding from a DoD
department or agency for RDT&E purposes, or for operational employment purposes after
integration into DoD weapon systems.

DoD RSO activities. RSO activities receiving resources, manpower, or funding from a DoD
department or agency, including leased space services when appropriate.

exempted laser. A laser registered with CDRUSSTRATCOM that has been determined not to
require further notification or coordination with CDRUSSTRATCOM due to meeting one of the
caveats of a Category I laser, in accordance with Paragraph 3.1.a.(2) of this issuance.

glint. Laser energy reflecting off the surface of an intentional or unintentional target.

hand-held lasers. Laser systems held and directed, aimed, fired, or otherwise operated by a
single human being with no mechanical support.

illumination. A laser light incident on the surface of an intentional or unintentional target.

laser. Devices that emit coherent electromagnetic radiation of wavelengths between 10nm and
1mm, developed through a process of stimulated emission.

LAL. A list of satellites that may serve as targets for non-destructive laser activities such as
ranging, tracking, calibration, and imaging.

LOAP. Any deviation from CDRUSSTRATCOM-approved lasing parameters that results in
laser energy being directed above-the-horizon or in space.

mission assurance. A process to protect or ensure the continued function and resilience of
capabilities and assets, including personnel, equipment, facilities, networks, information systems,
infrastructure, and supply chains critical to the performance of DoD mission-essential functions
in any operating environment or condition.

notification services. A process by which CDRUSSTRATCOM compiles and distributes
information -- which has been provided by laser owners and operators to CDRUSSTRATCOM
about upcoming laser activities -- to satellite owners and operators, and satellite owners and
operators are provided the opportunity to adjust mission parameters to mitigate potential risks.

operational employment. The tactical use of laser capabilities for offensive or defensive
purposes after the laser has been integrated into DoD weapon systems in accordance with
CJCSM 3230.01 or other laser-based capabilities that enable DoD operations.


GLOSSARY                                                                                           18
                                                                     DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


probabilistic analysis. A quantitative analysis using probabilistic distributions to estimate the
effect on RSOs by specific laser systems or activities.

PRA. An analysis to estimate risk by computing real numbers to determine what could go
wrong, how likely is it that something will go wrong, and what the consequences would be if
something did go wrong. Specific to this issuance, PRA is a quantitative analysis of the potential
illumination of, and effect on, RSOs by specific laser systems or activities. The analysis will
utilize reasonable expectation standards and a probabilistic approach. Laser categorization and
subsequent risk reduction measures will be based on this assessment.

protection. Active and passive defensive measures to minimize adverse effects to space objects
due to intentional or unintentional laser illumination.

reasonable expectation standard. A group of modeling parameters that will be applied to
calculations in the probabilistic risk assessment. Using these parameters, the analysis will return
a low risk of damage to illuminated space objects where the laser operations could only cause
damage through extraordinary circumstances or an improbable chain of events. These
parameters will include variables such as frequency of accidental illuminations, degree of
severity of a possible accidental illumination, probability of exposure to the space object
population, and possible effects of an accidental illumination.

RDT&E. All tests, series of tests, demonstrations, or exercises of a laser, laser technology, or
emerging laser technology for the purpose of advancing the understanding of a laser capability or
the object upon which the laser is used.

resilience. The ability of an architecture to support the functions necessary for mission success
with higher probability, shorter periods of reduced capability, and across a wider range of
scenarios, conditions, and threats, in spite of hostile action or adverse condition, as defined in
DoDD 3100.10.

risk acceptance. A risk handling option exercised by an official with appropriate authority who
acknowledges that the risk event or condition may be realized and willingly accepts the risk with
its consequences.

risk management. A method that enables informed decisions about laser illumination above the
horizon or in space to accept, reduce, or offset risk, and subsequently make decisions that weigh
overall risk against mission benefits, and which includes identification of mitigation measures
that can be taken to reduce risks.

RSO. A manufactured object intended to orbit the earth, the moon, or another celestial body
(e.g., spacecraft) or an object that remains in orbit as a result of that intent (e.g., rocket bodies
debris, whether functioning or non-functioning).

RSO operator. The organization, individual, or entity responsible for directing a space object at
a given time.

RSO owner. The organization, individual, or entity responsible for a space object at a given
time. For DoD satellites, the organization with operational control


GLOSSARY                                                                                                19
                                                                  DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


safe and responsible operations. Procedures undertaken, using the reasonable expectation
standard, to protect space objects from harm by either intentional or unintentional laser
illumination.

space systems. Any actively functioning spacecraft orbiting the Earth, including satellites and
humans in space.

space-to-surface. Laser energy from a space-based platform that is ultimately terminated by
land, water, or other terrestrial backstop.

special use space range. A specified three dimensional region defined in earth coordinates
during a specified time period in which DoD laser operations will occur. Notification of satellite
owners and operators of these parameters will allow operational tactics to minimize risk.

surface-to-surface. Laser energy from a land-based or water-based platform that is aimed at a
land-based or water-based target.

target. Any object or point serving as the aim-point for intentional laser illumination.

unintentional illumination. Non-deliberate illumination of an object by a laser beam.

unauthorized illumination. Laser illumination of an object without first receiving permission
from the proper authority when such permission is required in advance of the illumination.

unwaived laser. A laser that poses a potential risk to space systems and that requires use of
CDRUSSTRATCOM-approved methods and procedures during illumination above the horizon
or in space.

vulnerability test. A test designed to determine satellite damage-threshold information from
laser illumination.

waived laser. A laser approved per CDRUSSTRATCOM standards for RDT&E; organize,
train, and equip activities; training; maintenance; and exercises for a specific period of time.

waiver. A determination made and documented by CDRUSSTRATCOM to authorize a laser
owner or operator to conduct a specific laser activity without the need for further coordination,
notification, or risk mitigation measures for a specific period of time.

weapon system. Per Joint Publication 1-02, a combination of one or more weapons with all
related equipment, materials, services, personnel, and means of delivery and deployment (if
applicable) required for self-sufficiency.




GLOSSARY                                                                                            20
                                                              DoDI 3100.11, October 24, 2016


                                      REFERENCES

Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3225.01, “Illumination of Objects in Space by
    Lasers,” February 12, 2013
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual 3230.01, “Directed Energy Weapon Initial
    Operational Employment Review and Approval Process,” October 7, 2015
Commander JFCC Space Memo, “(U) Satellite Protection Direction for the Laser Clearinghouse
    (LCH),” May 15, 2014
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Delegations of Authority,” November 30, 2006
Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “Designation of the Principal DoD Space Advisor,”
    October 5, 2015
DoD Directive 2060.1, “Implementation of, and Compliance with, Arms Control Agreements,”
    January 9, 2001, as amended.
DoD Directive 3100.10, “Space Policy,” October 18, 2012
DoD Directive 3020.26, “Department of Defense Continuity Programs,” January 9, 2009
DoD Directive 5101.02E, “DoD Executive Agent (EA) for Space,” January 25, 2013
DoD Directive 5105.23, “National Reconnaissance Office (NRO),” June 28, 2011, as amended.
DoD Directive 5111.1, “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)),” December 8, 1999
DoD Directive 5134.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics
    (USD(AT&L)),” December 9, 2005, as amended.
DoD Directive 5143.01, “Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)),” October 24,
    2014, as amended.
DoD Instruction 5000.69, “DoD Joint Services Weapon and Laser System Safety Review
    Processes” November 9, 2011
DoD Instruction 5015.02, “DoD Records Management Program” February 24, 2015
DoD Manual 8910.01, Volume 1, “DoD Information Collections Manual: Procedures for DoD
    Internal Information Collections,” June 30, 2014, as amended
Joint Publication 1-02, “DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,” March 15, 2015
Military Standard-882E, “Department of Defense Standard Practice for System Safety”
National Reconnaissance Office Memo 2011-01, “(U) Satellite Protection from Inadvertent
    Lasing” February 14, 2012
Secretary of Defense Memorandum, “DoD Policy on Blinding Lasers,” January 17, 1997




REFERENCES                                                                                  21
